Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare
Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare
Government of India
Krishi Bhawan, New Delhi-110001
Revamped
Operational Guidelines
Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima Yojana
(Eﬀecve from Kharif 2020)

Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima Yojana
(PMFBY)
REVAMPED
OPERATIONAL GUIDELINES
Eﬀecve from Kharif 2020
Department of Agriculture, Cooperaon and Farmers Welfare
Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare
Government of India
Krishi Bhawan, New Delhi-110001

INDEX
Sl. No. Section Page No.
Abbreviations
Objective of the Scheme
Adoption of Technology for Scheme Administration
Coverage of Farmers
Coverage of Crops
Coverage of Risks & Exclusions
Preconditions for Implementation of the Scheme
Tendering and Notiﬁcation
Engagement of Common Service Centres and Other
Intermediaries for Coverage of Non Loanee Farmers
Electronic Remittance of Funds
Census Code Mapping of Entities
Digitization of Land Records
Sum Insured/Coverage Limit
Premium Rates and Premium Subsidy
Budget for Administrative Expenses
Technical Support Unit (TSU)/Central Programme
Management Unit (CPMU)
Seasonality Discipline
Collection of Applications and Premium from Farmers
Assessment of Loss/Short Fall in Yield
Dispute Resolution Regarding Yield Data/Crop Loss
Use of Innovative Technologies in Yield Estimation
Assessment of Claims & Claim Settlement
Participation of Loss Assessors/Evaluators for Loss
Assessment under the Scheme
Procedure for Settlement of Claims to the Farmers
Important Conditions/Clauses Applicable for Coverage of Risks
Acreage Discrepancy
Information Education and Communication (IEC)
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
16
17
18
19
20
21
23
24
25
26
10
11
12
13
14
www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY
15
22
1
2 - 4
4 - 5
5
5 - 6
7 - 9
9 - 21
21 - 22
22 - 23
23
23
23
24 - 25
25 - 26
26
26 - 33
33 - 41
41 - 45
45 - 51
51 - 59
59 - 86
86 - 87
88 - 89
89 - 90
90 - 91
92 - 94

www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY
Section Page No.
Service Charges
Goods & Service Tax (GST)
Monitoring and Review of the Scheme
Grievance Redressal Mechanism
Empanelment and Selection of Insurance Companies
Clustering/Clubbing of Districts for Bidding by the State
Assessment of Performance and De-empanelment of
Insurance Companies
Evaluation of Efﬁciency of Nodal Department of the State
Role & Responsibilities of Various Agencies
Enhanced Version of National Crop Insurance Portal for
Administration of Crop Insurance Program (www.pmfby.gov.in)
Annexure - I
Annexure - II
Annexure - III
Annexure - IV
Annexure - V
27
28
29
30
31
32
34
35
36
Sl. No.
33
94 - 95
95
95 - 96
96 - 98
99 - 100
100 - 101
101 - 102
102
102 - 111
111 - 118
119 - 123
124 - 125
126 - 132
133 - 140
141 - 147

www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY
TABLE INDEX
Table No. Topic Para. No.
Premium Rate Payable by the Farmer
Seasonality Discipline
Calculation of Crop-wise Sum Insured
Number of CCEs to be Conducted at IU Level
Yield Calculation for Multi-Picking Crops
Types of Resolution to be used for Vegetation Index
derivation for Different Levels of Analysis
Calculation of Threshold Yield
Detailed Procedure and Timelines for Payment of Prevented /
Failed Sowing and Prevented Planting / Germination Claims
Detailed Procedure for on Account Payment of Claims due
to Mid-Season Adversity
Detailed Procedure and Timelines for payment of
localized claims
Detailed Procedure and Timelines for payment of
Post-Harvest Losses
Criteria for Performance Evaluation and Ranking of Loss
Assessment Agencies
Add-on Coverage for Crop Loss due to Attack by
Wild Animals
Format for Reporting of Excess Area Insured / Acreage
Discrepancy for Consideration of Application of Areas
Correction Factor by Insurance Company for all
Insurance Units
Table 6
Table 7
Table 8
Table 9
Table 10
Table 11
Table 12
Table 1
Table 2
Table 3
Table 4
Table 5
21.3.5.11
21.4.6.7
21.5.10
21.6.7.1
22.1.5, 22.2
Annexure-I
Annexure-II
Annexure-III
13.1
16.4
17.5.6
18.2
18.4.7.3
19.7.5
21.2.1
Illustration for Classiﬁcation of Risks, Clubbing / Clustering of
Risks and Districts and Determination of L1 Bidder
Penalty and Performance Monitoring / Evaluation of
Empanelled Insurance Companies Annexure-IV
Annexure-VIllustrative Evaluation of Efﬁciency of Nodal Department
of State

ABBREVIATIONS
www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY
ACF Area Correction Factor
AEPS Aadhaar Enabled Payment System
AIC Agriculture Insurance Company of India Limited
AI&ML Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Machine Learning
API Application Programming Interface
APR Actuarial Premium Rate
ARG Automatic Rain Gauge
AU Administrative Unit
AWiFS Advanced Wide Field Sensor
AWS Automatic Weather Stations
AY Actual Yield
BC Banking Correspondent
CAG Comptroller and Auditor General
CB Commercial Banks
CBS Core Banking Solution
CCAFS Research Program on Climate Change, Agriculture and Food Security
CCEs Crop Cutting Experiments
CGM Chief General Manager
CGST Central Goods and Services Tax
CHAMAN Coordinated Horticulture and Management using geoiNformatics
CPGRAMS Centralized Public Grievance Redressal and Monitoring System
CPMU Central Program Management Unit
CSC Common Service Centre
CSC SPV Common Service Centre Special Purpose Vehicle
CSC VLE Common Service Centre Village Level Entrepreneur
CSO Central Statistical Organisation
CV Coefﬁcient of Variation
CVC Central Vigilance Commission
DAC&FW Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare
DBT Direct Beneﬁt Transfer
DC District Collector
DCCBs District Central Cooperative Banks
DDM District Development Manager
DES Directorate of Economics & Statistics
DGRC District Level Grievance Redressal Committee
DILRMP Digital India Land Record Modernisation Program
DLJC District Level Joint Committee
DLMC District Level Monitoring Committee
DM Deviation Matrix
DM* District Magistrate
DSSAT Decision Support System for Agrotechnology Transfer
E&MIS Evaluation & Management Information System
ESI Expected Sum Insured
EVI Enhanced Vegetation Index
EV-NCIP Enhanced Version of National Crop Insurance Portal

FASAL Forecasting Agricultural Output Using Space, AgroMeterology and Land Based
Observations
FIs Financial Institutions
FY Financial Year
GCA Gross Cropped Area
GCES General Crop Estimation Survey
GFR General Financial Rule
GIC Re General Insurance Corporation of India
GoI Government of India
GP Gram Panchayat
GRAMS Grievance Redressal and Monitoring System
GRC Grievance Redressal Committee
GRO Grievance Redressal Ofﬁcer
GST Goods & Service Tax
GWDI Ground Water Drought Index
HQ Headquarter
IA Implementing Agency
IARI Indian Agriculture Research Institute
IASRI Indian Agricultural Statistical Research Institute
IC Insurance Company
ICAR Indian Council of Agricultural Research
ID Identity
IEC Information Education and Communication
IFD Internal Finance Division
IFPRI International Food Policy Research Institute
IFSC Indian Financial System Code
ILC Inland Letter Card
IMD Indian Meteorological Department
IRDAI Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority of India
IRRI International Rice Research Institute
ISRO Indian Space Research Organisation
ISS Interest Subvention Scheme
IT Information Technology
IU Insurance Unit
KCC Kisan Credit Card
KVK Krishi Vigyan Kendra
LAI Leaf Area Index
LC Loss Cost
LDM Lead District Manager
LISS Linear Imaging Self Scanning Sensor
LPA Long Period Average
LPC Land Possession Certiﬁcate
LU Land Use
MAI Moisture Adequacy Index
MIS Management Information System
www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY

MNCFC Mahalanobis National Crop Forecast Centre
MoA&FW Ministry of Agriculture& Farmers Welfare
MODIS Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer
MOEF&CC Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change
MOSDAC Meteorological and Oceanographic Satellite Data Archival Centre
MoU Memorandum of Understanding
MSP Minimum Support Price
NABARD National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development
NADAMS National Agricultural Drought Assessment and Monitoring System
NCIP National Crop Insurance Portal
NDVI Normalized Difference Vegetation Index
NDWI Normalized Difference Water Index
NER North Eastern Region
NFA Notiﬁed Area
NIA National Insurance Academy
NLMC National Level Monitoring Committee
NOACPC National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration Climate Prediction Centre
NRSC National Remote Sensing Centre, ISRO
NSSO National Sample Survey Organization
NTSU National Technical Support Unit
OG Operational Guidelines
OTP One Time Password
PACS Primary Agricultural Credit Society
PASM Plant Available Soil Moisture
PFMS Public Finance Management System
PMU Project Management Unit
PPP Public-Private Partnership
PRI Panchayati Raj Institutions
R&D Research & Development
RBI Reserved Bank of India
RF Rainfall
RMSE Root Mean Square Error
ROR Record of Rights
RRBs Regional Rural Banks
RSI Reservoir Storage Index
RST Remote Sensing Technology
RWBCIS Restructured Weather Based Crop Insurance Scheme
SAC Space Applications Centre, ISRO
SAO Seasonal Agricultural Operations
SAR Synthetic Aperture Data
SAU State Agricultural University
SC Scheduled Caste
SCBs Scheduled Commercial Banks
SFDI Stream Flow Drought Index
SGST State Goods and Services Tax
www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY

www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY
SI Sum Insured
SLA Service Level Agreement
SLBC State Level Bankers Committee
SLCC State Level Coordination Committee
SLCCCI State Level Coordination Committee on Crop Insurance
SMS Short Message Service
SOF Scale of Finance
SOP Standard Operating Procedure
SPI Standardized Precipitation Index
SRSAC State Remote Sensing Application Centre
SST Smart Sampling Technique
ST Scheduled Tribe
STAC State Level Technical Advisory Committee
STSU State Technical Support Unit
TA Technical Agency
TAC Technical Advisory Committee
TCI Temperature Condition Index
TSU Technical Support Unit
TY Threshold Yield
UAV Unmanned Aerial Vehicle
UIDAI Unique Identiﬁcation Authority of India
UT Union Territory
UTR Unique Transaction Reference
VCI Vegetation Condition Index
VEDAS Visualization of Earth Observation Data and Archival System
VHI Vegetation Health Index
VLE Village Level Entrepreneur
WMO World Meteorological Organisation

Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima Yojana (PMFBY) was launched from Kharif 2016
with aim to support production in agriculture by providing an affordable crop
insurance product to ensure comprehensive risk cover for crops of farmers against
all non-preventable natural risks from pre-sowing to post-harvest stage. The
Scheme has completed 8 crop seasons and is being implemented across
States/Union Territories (UTs).
After the commencement of the Scheme, The Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers
Welfare (MoA&FW), Government of India (GoI) has endeavoured to make the
Scheme more effective, transparent and auto-administration driven with the
intention to minimize manual interventions and eliminate usage of variable
methodologies for implementation and execution on the ground. This was
facilitated by a detailed set of Operational Guidelines (OGs) and by leveraging
efﬁcient and cutting-edge technological solutions.
Based on the past experiences of implementing the Scheme (between
2016-2018), study reports of various research institutions and feedback received
from stakeholders, the scheme was reviewed and the revised OGs were broughtst
into effect from 01 Oct 2018 addressing major challenges. However, few
challenges remained, especially long term tendering, optional coverage to all
farmers, increase in the scope of risk cover and the addition of add-on covers.
These issues were still required to be addressed in order to increase the
acceptability and efﬁcacy of the Scheme as well as meet the aspirations of
stakeholders as per varied requirements of region-wise agrarian conditions.
The MoA&FW had instituted a stakeholder consultation with State Governments,
Farmers Organizations, ICs, Re-Insurance Companies, Financial Institutions,
Research and Technical Organizations and the Central Government Ministries and
Departments to identify the key challenges and ﬁnalize possible solutions/remedial
measures to address such challenges. Based on the outcome of the consultations
and discussions, the required corrections/changes were approved by the Union
Cabinet for incorporation in the OGs of PMFBY/Restructured Weather Based Crop
Insurance Scheme (RWBICS). Accordingly, the OGs have been updated for
reference and adoption by all stakeholders for effective implementation of the
revamped PMFBY/RWBCIS.
1. Objective of the Scheme
PMFBY aims at supporting sustainable production in agriculture sector by way of:
• Providing ﬁnancial support to farmers suffering crop loss/damage arising out of
unforeseen events.
• Stabilizing the income of farmers to ensure their continuance in farming.
• Encouraging farmers to adopt innovative and modern agricultural practices.
• Ensuring credit worthiness of the farmers, crop diversiﬁcation and enhancing
growth and competitiveness of agriculture sector besides protecting the
farmers from production risks.
www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY
Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima Yojana
1

www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY
2. Adoption of Technology for Scheme Administration:
2.1 In an endeavour to integrate Technology in implementation and execution of the
Scheme, Government of India has designed and developed a National Crop
Insurance Portal (NCIP) (www.pmfby.gov.in) which has been in use since Kharif
2018. This has brought in better administration and coordination amongst
stakeholders viz. Farmers, States, Insurers and Banks as well as ensured real
time dissemination of information and transparency in implementation.
2.2 Continued running of the Portal successfully calls for responsible participation by
different stakeholders who will have the responsibility for census coding and
regular updation of revenue/administrative units, AWS code mapping and requisite
information/details as per the login credential module.
2.3 Implementing States and ICs during each crop season are required to digitize and
upload basic information like notiﬁed areas, crops, sum insured, Government
subsidy, and premium to be paid by farmers and name of the implementing IC in the
particular insurance unit etc. on the portal well within the prescribed timeline. This
will facilitate farmers and other stakeholders to get the relevant information on
Internet and through SMS for the concerned season. State Government and
concerned IC will be responsible for any incorrect entry/ errors/ omissions etc
during digitization.
2.4 Digitization of basic information/notiﬁcation should compulsorily be done before
ﬂoating tender documents which will be followed by the entry of L1 Premium rates
and name of the selected Insurance Company immediately after ﬁnalization of bids
and issuance of work order.
2.5 Since the NCIP has been operationalised for auto administration and seamless
ﬂow of data/information/reports on real-time basis, the State Government would
not be allowed to create/use a separate Portal/website for Crop Insurance
purposes*. (*Presently, the States of Gujarat and Karnataka are already running
their portals. They will have to migrate to NCIP as per the timelines agreed between
GoI and the respective States. Till the time migration to NCIP is completed, Gujarat
and Karnataka have to ensure regular transfer of data to NCIP).
2.6 All Stakeholders have deﬁned roles and responsibilities and accessibility to related
modules on the Portal for the administration of the Scheme. Details of the
operationalization of modules for each stakeholder is available on the Portal.
2.7 Secured credential/login, preferably linked with Aadhaar Number and mobile One
Time Password (OTP) based, for all Stakeholders viz, Central Government, State
Governments, Banks, empanelled ICs and their designated ﬁeld functionaries will
be provided on the Portal to enable them to enter/upload/download the requisite
information.
2.8 The ICs shall not distribute/collect/allow any other proforma/utility/web Portal etc.
for collecting details of insured farmers separately. However, they may provide all
requisite support to facilitate Bank Branches/Primary Agriculture Credit Societies
(PACS) /Common Service Centres (CSCs)/Banking Correspondents (BCs) for
uploading the farmers' details on the Portal well within the prescribed cut-off dates.
2.9 Only those farmers whose data is uploaded on the NCIP and their share of
premium has been remitted to the concerned IC within the prescribed time limit,
shall be eligible for Insurance coverage. The premium subsidy from State and
Central Government will be released accordingly.
2

2.10 All data pertaining to crop-wise, Insurance Unit (IU) wise historical yield data,
Notional value of average yield/Scale of Finance (SOF), Sown Area, Coverage
and Claims data, Threshold Yield (TY) and Actual Yield (AY) shall be made
available by the State Government on the NCIP for the purpose of premium rating
and claim calculation, etc. For the calculation of admissible claims for RWBCIS,
requisite information like weather data, detailed term sheet with triggers and exit
values and notional sum insured, etc. will be provided on NCIP by the concerned
State Government.
2.11 The Banks/Financial Institutions (FIs)/other intermediaries need to compulsorily
transfer the individual farmer's data electronically to the NCIP. Accordingly,
banks/FIs may endeavour to undertake Core Banking System (CBS)
integration in a time bound manner for real-time transfer of information/data.
2.12 It is also proposed to develop an integrated platform/portal for both PMFBY and
Interest Subvention Scheme (ISS). The data/information of both the Schemes shall
be auto-synchronized to enable real-time sharing of information and better
program monitoring.
2.13 The ICs shall compulsorily use technology/mobile applications for monitoring of
crop health/Crop Cutting Experiments (CCEs)/reporting of crop losses, crop
survey etc. in coordination with the concerned States. States shall also facilitate
Insurance Companies with Satellite Imagery wherever required and also facilitate
usage of Drones by way of prior approval of agency from which such data can be
sourced. ICs can also use the services of the Government/empaneled technical
agencies for conducting relevant studies/validation. This is required for better
monitoring and ground-truthing. ICs can be active partners in facilitating the use
of technology.

2.14 The Department of the State Government responsible for managing the digital land
record/website will facilitate the integration of land record and provide Application
Programing Interface (API) for smooth access to the land records of the concerned
farmer for validation on NCIP, free of cost.
2.15 Suitable technology/methodology shall be explored and adopted for direct
estimation of yield at Gram Panchayat (GP) level, adoption of 2 step Yield
Estimation methodology, Optimization of CCEs and Smart Sampling Technique
(SST) for conduct of CCEs.
2.16 States shall adopt technology, such as satellite imagery, drones, Unmanned
Aerial Vehicle (UAV) and remote sensing for various applications such as crop area
estimation and yield disputes and also promote the use of remote sensing and
other related technology for CCE planning, yield estimation, loss assessment,
assessment of prevented sowing and clustering of districts.
2.17 Use of technology derived solutions for calculation of Yield will be triggered in the
following instances when:
2.17.1 Requisite number of CCEs have not been conducted at the Insurance Unit (IU)
level or one level higher than the IU level.
or
2.17.2 The yield data submitted by the Nodal Department of the State Government is
disputed by the IC due to non-compliance of the deﬁned procedure for conducting
CCEs.
or
www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY 3

www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY
2.17.3 The Nodal Department of State Government is unable to submit Actual or
approved yield data (CCE Agri App based) for at-least 90% of total Crop Cutting
Experiments (CCEs) conducted, within 2 months of the cut-off date of completion
of CCEs.
3. Coverage of Farmers:
3.1 All farmers including sharecroppers and tenant farmers growing the notiﬁed crops
in the notiﬁed areas are eligible for coverage. However, farmers should have
insurable interest for the insured crops and lands. Such farmers are required to
submit necessary documentary evidence of land records prevailing in the State
(Records of Right (RoR), Land Possession Certiﬁcate (LPC) etc.) and/or applicable
contract/ agreement details/ other documents notiﬁed/ permitted by concerned
State Government in case of sharecroppers/tenant farmers and the same should
be deﬁned by the respective States in the notiﬁcation itself. Such farmers are also
required to essentially submit Aadhaar Number and declaration about the crop
sown/ crops intended to be sown.
3.1.1 Farmers availing the Kisan Credit Card (KCC)/Crop loan/Loanee Farmers:
3.1.1.1 The scheme is optional for all farmers including farmers who have been sanctioned
short-term Seasonal Agricultural Operations (SAO) loans/Kisan Credit Card (KCC)
for the notiﬁed crops from deﬁned FIs (hereinafter referred to as Loanee farmers).
Existing Loanee farmers who do not want to get covered under the scheme have
the option of opting-out from the Schemes by submitting requisite declaration to
loan sanctioning bank branches any time during the year but at least seven days
prior to the cut-off date for enrolment of farmers for the respective season. All those
farmers who do not submit the declaration would be essentially covered.
3.1.1.2 Farmer whose KCC /crop loan has become sub-standard as deﬁned and as per
prevailing practices of the concerned Banks/Government regulator shall not be
considered as a Loanee farmer. However, bank branches may facilitate such
farmers for enrolment as non-loanee farmers.
3.1.1.3 Merely, sanctioning of crop loan against other collateral securities including ﬁxed
deposits, gold/jewel loans, mortgage loans etc. without having insurable
interest of the farmer on the insurable land and notiﬁed crops shall not be
eligible for coverage under the Scheme.
3.1.2 Other Farmers/Non-loanee Farmers:
As mentioned in Para 3.1.1.1 above, the Scheme is optional for all farmers
including non-loanee farmers/other farmers.
3.1.2.1 The insurance coverage will strictly be equivalent to the sum insured/hectare, as
deﬁned in the Government notiﬁcation or /and on NCIP multiplied by proposed
sown area for notiﬁed crop for enrolment.
3.1.3 Special efforts shall be made to ensure maximum coverage of Scheduled Caste
(SC)/ Scheduled Tribe (ST)/ Women farmers under the Scheme. Further
Panchayat Raj Institutions (PRIs) may be involved in the extension activities and
awareness creation among farmers and obtaining feedback from farmers about the
implementation of the Scheme.
4

www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY
3.1.4 The implementing IC selected as L1 will be responsible for taking necessary
measures to ensure at least 10% incremental increase in coverage of non-loanee
farmers in the district. However, other empanelled ICs which have participated in
the bidding and are keen for enrolment of non loanee farmers in the cluster may
also be allowed to enrol non-loanee farmers at L1 premium rate. The interested
companies have to inform their willingness in writing within 7 days of the
ﬁnalisation of tender/issuance of work order to L1. It will however be the
responsibility of all the ICs engaged in this process to ensure that duplicate
enrolment does not happen in the given cluster/district. Engaging companies other
than L1 for enrolling non-loanee farmers will be taken up on a pilot basis in Districts
notiﬁed/allowed by the State Government. They shall enrol the non-loanee
farmers as per the conditions laid down in Para 17.6.
3.1.5 These ICs will maintain a separate database of such non-loanee farmers covered
by them and enter the said data on the portal as per the seasonality discipline
detailed in Para 16.4. They shall be liable for the payment of claims to such farmers.
3.1.6 The exchange of information and co-witnessing of CCEs for the district by the
Government/NCIP will be limited to L1 Company only and it will be binding on other
companies to accept it. The Nodal Department of State Government shall share the
yield data for the computation of claims with all concerned ICs in the relevant IUs
where they have done business for coverage of non-loanee farmers. Requisition
for payment of Government subsidy in respect of non-loanee farmers enrolled by
other ICs will be submitted directly to the Government designated agency. Claim
calculation can be simultaneously done on NCIP based on the relevant crop-wise,
IU-wise AY and TY data, weather data, threshold values and insured area data
entered/shared by the respective State Government.
4. Coverage of Crops:
I. Food crops (Cereals, Millets and Pulses).
II. Oilseeds.
III. Annual Commercial / Annual Horticultural crops.
IV. In addition, pilots for coverage can be taken for those perennial
horticultural/commercial crops for which standard methodology for yield
estimation is available.
5. Coverage of Risks and Exclusions:
5.1 Basic Cover: The basic cover under the scheme covers the risk of loss of yield to
standing crop (sowing to harvesting).This comprehensive risk insurance is
provided to cover yield losses on an area based approach basis due to
non-preventable risks like drought, dry spells, ﬂood, inundation, wide spread pest
and disease attack, landslides, natural ﬁre due to lightening, storm, hailstorm,
and cyclone.
5.2 Add-On Coverage: Apart from the mandatory basic cover, the State
Governments/UTs, in consultation with the State Level Coordination Committee
on Crop Insurance (SLCCCI) may choose any or all of the following add-on covers
based on the need of the speciﬁc crop/area in their State to cover the following
stages of the crop and risks leading to crop loss.
5

www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY
5.2.1 Prevented Sowing/Planting/Germination Risk: Insured area is prevented from
sowing/planting/germination due to deﬁcit rainfall or adverse seasonal/climatic
conditions.
5.2.2 Mid-Season Adversity: Loss in case of adverse seasonal conditions during the
crop season viz. ﬂoods, prolonged dry spells and severe drought etc., wherein
expected yield during the season is likely to be less than 50% of the normal yield.
This add-on coverage facilitates the provision for immediate relief to insured
farmers in case of occurrence of such risks.
5.2.3 Post-Harvest Losses: Coverage is available only up to a maximum period of two
weeks from harvesting, for those crops which are required to be dried in cut and
spread / small bundled condition depending on requirement of the crops in that
area, in the ﬁeld after harvesting against speciﬁc perils of hailstorm, cyclone,
cyclonic rains and unseasonal rains.
5.2.4 Localized Calamities: Loss/damage to notiﬁed insured crops resulting from
occurrence of identiﬁed localized risks of hailstorm, landslide, inundation, cloud
burst and natural ﬁre due to lightening affecting isolated farms in the notiﬁed area.
5.2.5 Add-on coverage for crop loss due to attack by wild animals: The States may
consider providing add-on coverage for crop loss due to the attack by wild animals
wherever the risk is perceived to be substantial and is identiﬁable. The detailed
protocol and procedure for evaluation of the bids has been prepared by the GoI in
consultation with the Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change
(MOEF&CC) and General Insurance Corporation of India (GIC Re). The add-on
coverage will be optional for the farmers and applicable notional premium will be
borne by the farmer, however the State Governments may consider providing
additional subsidy on this coverage, wherever notiﬁed. The actuarial premium
rates for add-on coverage should be sought in the bid itself from the IC, however the
add-on actuarial premium rate will be considered separately and shall not form part
of evaluation of L1. Detailed modalities are annexed as Annexure - I for adoption
by States.

5.3 States have to notify crop-wise speciﬁc period/duration for coverage of aforesaid
add-on risks in their notiﬁcation as detailed in Para 7.2 of this guideline and the
same will also be uploaded on NCIP.
5.4 General Exclusions: Losses arising out of war and nuclear risks, malicious
damage and other preventable risks shall be excluded.
5.5 Loss/damage for localised calamities and post-harvest losses will be
assessed at the level of the individual insured farm and hence lodging of loss
intimation by the farmer/designated agencies is essential. For remaining
risks, losses are due to widespread calamities, hence lodging of intimation
for claims by insured farmers / designated agencies for such wide-spread
calamities is not essential. Claims will be calculated based on the loss
assessment report submitted by the District Level Joint Committee (DLJC)
and/or average yield submitted by concerned State Government.
5.6 Details of indemniﬁcation and claims calculation for aforesaid add-on cover are
provided in Para 21.
6

www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY
6 Preconditions for implementation of the Scheme:
6.1 States:
Issuance of Notiﬁcation by the State Governments / UTs for the implementation of
the Scheme will imply their acceptance of all the provisions, modalities and OGs of
the Scheme. The main conditions relating to the scheme which are binding on
States/UTs are as follows:
6.1.1 Digitization of IU-wise administrative/revenue hierarchy along with Scheme; crops;
level of IUs notiﬁed, crop-wise sum insured, crop-wise indemnity level, crop-wise
Threshold Yield (TY) at Insurance Unit (IU) level for notiﬁed crops, opted risk
coverage, details of Automatic Weather Stations (AWS), Automatic Rain Gauges
(ARG) of the IMD/State Government/Private Providers which have been stationed
as per the standards deﬁned by the India Meteorological Department (IMD)/World
Meteorological Organisation (WMO) and are certiﬁed by the IMD and integration of
digitized land records with NCIP.
6.1.2 Adoption of innovative technology especially smart phones/ hand-held devices for
capturing the conduct of CCEs through CCE-Agri App and the use of NCIP
platform to enable ﬂow of information and auto administration of the scheme.
6.1.3 Making an additional provision of a separate budget allocation of 3% of the total
budget of the Scheme for administrative expenses from Financial Year (FY)
2020-21 for meeting the day to day expenses for monitoring, Information Education
& Communication (IEC) and evaluation activities and other administrative work
related to the implementation of the Scheme such as recruitment and deployment
of manpower, infrastructure development, etc.
6.1.4 Conduct requisite number of CCEs at the level of notiﬁed IU area and approve the
actual yield data as recorded in the CCE Agri App.
6.1.5 CCE-based yield estimation data has to be uploaded on the NCIP to enable
auto-calculation of claims. In case the Nodal Department does not provide/upload
actual yield data within 2 months of the notiﬁed CCE completion date, technology
derived solutions will be used for the computation of Synthetic Yield data for
claim settlement.
6.1.6 State/ UT will make necessary budgetary provision for premium subsidy based on
fair estimates, at the beginning of the crop season to ensure timely premium
payment to ICs enabling faster claim settlement. The non-payment of the State
Share of premium subsidy within the prescribed timelines as deﬁned in the
seasonality discipline will lead to the disqualiﬁcation of the State Government to
implement the scheme in the next season. The cut-off date for invoking thisst
provision for Kharif and Rabi seasons will be 31 March for succeeding years andth
30 September for that year, respectively.
6.1.7 To carry out pilot studies for improved yield estimations using technology. Adoption
of protocol/Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) for smart sampling technique,
optimization of CCEs, 2 Step Yield Estimation method and direct yield estimation
procedure as issued and modiﬁed by the GoI from time to time.
6.1.8 The present composition of the State level Coordination Committee on Crop
Insurance (SLCCCI) includes the representation of concerned Departments of the
State Government, Reserve Bank of India (RBI), National Bank for Agriculture and
7

Rural Development (NABARD), empanelled ICs and the State Level Bankers
Committee (SLBCs) which may be strengthened by including representatives from
the State Horticulture Department, State Remote Sensing Application Centre
(SRSAC), IMD Experts from Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR)/State
Agriculture Universities (SAU) and Farmers' Representatives including women
farmers for implementing PMFBY. Chairman of the State Level Coordination
Committee on Crop Insurance (SLCCCI) may co-opt representatives from other
departments/agencies, if considered necessary.
6.1.9 Adequate preparedness for ensuring availability of all crop loss and yield data on
National Crop Insurance Portal (NCIP) as computation of claims including those
related to add-on cover will be done mandatorily on the basis of data uploaded
on NCIP.
6.2 Insurance Companies (ICs):
Empanelment of ICs and their participation for the implementation of the Scheme
will imply their acceptance of all provisions, modalities and guidelines of the
Schemes. The empanelled ICs have to deploy requisite infrastructure and
resources for the implementation of PMFBY particularly for the following identiﬁed
major activities:
6.2.1 To carry out Pilot studies for leveraging new technology for the effective
implementation of Scheme in a transparent manner.
6.2.2 Deployment of requisite infrastructure to widen the outreach of the Scheme and
enabling access to related services to the rural farmers at their doorstep, with a
commitment for at least 10% incremental increase in Non-loanee coverage for
a season.
6.2.3 Deployment of sufﬁcient manpower to co-observe CCEs and allied activities and
compulsory use of CCE Co-observation app.
6.2.4 Allocation of requisite resources for IEC activities including awareness generation
and capacity building of stakeholders about the Scheme. The detailed planning for
the same should be submitted to the Centre and State Government in advance i.e.
before the start of each season as prescribed in these OGs.
6.2.5 Creation of a grievance redressal mechanism at the ground level covering the
Sub-district, District, State and National level, putting in place a robust and effective
method for grievance registration, handling, resolution, disposal and reporting etc
as referred in Para 30 of these OGs.
6.2.6 Settlement of claims to the eligible farmers under the Basic Product and all insured
add-on covers as per the prescribed timelines as deﬁned in the seasonality
discipline.
6.2.7 Timely payment of service charge to Banks (4% of farmer's premium) and requisite
commission to Common Service Centre - Special Purpose Vehicle (CSC-SPV).
6.3 Banks and other enrolment channels:
Participation in implementation of the Scheme (PMFBY) will imply their acceptance
of all provisions, modalities and the OGs of the Scheme. The participating Banks,
other channels like CSC, Insurance Intermediaries and ICs have to deploy
requisite infrastructure and resources for implementation of PMFBY particularly for
following identiﬁed major activities:
www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY 8

www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY
6.3.1 Creation of digital credentials for each user and compulsory digital data entry of
farmers' details on NCIP as per the prescribed enrolment module within the
stipulated timelines as deﬁned in the Seasonality discipline.
6.3.2 Digitization of correct and updated information of the insured farmers on NCIP after
due validation with the records available with the bank/farmers including validated
insured area, name of IUs, Crops and Bank Account details etc.
6.3.3 Uploading copies of the requisite documents by all channels except for the
enrolments done through banks.
6.3.4 Timely remittance of farmer's premium through payment gateway linked with NCIP
strictly as per timelines to implementing ICs.
6.4 Submission of UID (AADHAAR) by farmer:
6.4.1 Aadhaar has been made mandatory for availing Crop insurance from Kharif
2017 season onwards. Therefore, all enrolment agencies are advised to
mandatorily obtain Aadhaar Number of their farmers.
6.4.2 Farmers not having Aadhaar Identity (ID) may also enrol under PMFBY subject to
their enrolment for Aadhaar and submission of proof of such enrolment as per
notiﬁcation No. 334.dated 8th February, 2017 issued by the GoI under Section 7 of
Aadhaar Act 2016 (Targeted Delivery of Financial and other Subsidies, Beneﬁts
and Services). Copy of the notiﬁcation may be perused on www.pmfby.gov.in. This
may be subject to further directions issued by the Government from time to time.
6.4.3 All enrolment agencies have to compulsorily take Aadhaar/Aadhaar enrolment
number as per the notiﬁcation under the Aadhaar Act before the sanction of crop
loan/KCC under the ISS. Hence the coverage of Loanee farmers without Aadhaar
does not arise and such accounts need to be reviewed by the concerned bank
branch regularly.
6.5 Agreement/Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) between States and
Insurance Companies:
6.5.1 States and ICs will enter into an agreement before the commencement of the ﬁrst
crop season as per the model agreement available on NCIP. The roles and
responsibilities of the States (Para 35.2) and ICs (Para 35.4) and provision of
performance evaluation matrix and applicable penalties (Section 33) will be a part
of the Agreement/MoU document necessarily.
7 Tendering and Notiﬁcation:
7.1 Procedure for Issuance of Tender by the States/UTs:
7.1.1 Revamped PMFBY provides for compulsory tender by the States/UTs for period of
3 years to ensure assured business to ICs for a longer duration leading to
increased commitment towards infrastructure and manpower deployment.
7.1.2 Detailed Model Tender Document has been provided to the States/UTs for its
adoption by Department of Agriculture, Cooperation & Farmers Welfareth
(DAC&FW) vide letter No. 13015/03/2018 - Credit -II, dated 8 April 2020. Copy of
the same is available on the NCIP.
7.1.3 Meeting of the SLCCCI should be convened prior to the commencement of the ﬁrst
crop season and well in advance for ﬁnalising the various terms and conditions and
calling of bids/issuance of the bid notice to all empanelled ICs for selection to
9

www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY
implement the Scheme during the risk period. States / UTs should ensure the
issuance of the notiﬁcation and its circulation to all concerned agencies/
departments/ institutions at least one month prior to the commencement of the crop
season incorporating all the essential details about insured crops, areas, Sum
Insured, TY at IU level for notiﬁed crops, opted risk cover, period of contract,
bidder's evaluation and selection methodology, premium rate for farmers,
Government subsidy along with seasonality discipline/ cut-off dates for each
activity etc. Notiﬁcation should be issued for at least one year to facilitate
banks for deduction of premium for a year and timely data entry on NCIP.
However, award of Tender to ICs will be for 3 years compulsorily.
7.1.4 In order to have transparency, all the details mentioned in the Model Tender
Document (refer Para 7.1.2) should mandatorily, be made a part of the tendering
process. No modiﬁcation in the terms and conditions enumerated in the tender
document shall be allowed post tendering.
7.1.5 Annexure for bid document may be generated through the Portal including
Crop-wise IU location master. The procedure and template for the same are
available on NCIP. Before ﬂoating the Tender, last 10 years yield data at the
notiﬁed/available level and TY at notiﬁed unit along with other information /data
should be uploaded on the Portal in the prescribed template and should be made a
part of the Tender Document. The prescribed list of data required to be published
along with the tender is detailed below to enable proper risk analysis and correct
premium rating.
7.1.5.1 Details about the notiﬁed scheme, notiﬁed crops, level of notiﬁed IUs, crop-wise
sum insured, crop-wise indemnity level, crop-wise TY at IUs level for notiﬁed crops,
desired risk coverages (basic cover, add-on covers):
A. Details of Automatic Weather Stations, Automatic Rain Gauges or IMD/State
Government/Private Providers which have been installed as per the
standards deﬁned by IMD/WMO and are certiﬁed by IMD.
B. Year wise historical Average Yield data for each notiﬁed crop at the Notiﬁed IU
level for past 10 years (including immediately preceding season/year).
C. Year wise, Crop-wise, IU level historical Coverage and Claim data for past 3
years (including immediately preceding season/year).
D. List of cluster wise districts.
E. Crop-wise nomenclature of yield being collated and reported along with the
conversion factor between the two nomenclatures (if applicable).
F. List of district-crops covered under different risk combinations along with
applicable TY and normal sowing and harvesting dates.
G. Classiﬁcation of irrigated and unirrigated districts in clusters as per irrigation
facilities available. If the States have not categorized irrigated/un-irrigated
district, GoI liability will be limited as per data available/published by
Directorate of Economics & Statistics (DES), DAC&FW and further revised
from time to time.
H. Stratiﬁed input cost for the indemniﬁcation of losses at different age/stage of
crops due to the localized calamities.
10

7.1.6 Calculation of the lowest weighted premium of district shall be based on the
insured area for notiﬁed crops in each district during last year/season.
However, in the absence of insured area details of last year/season for all proposed
crops or any crop, immediately preceding year's available insured area will be
considered for calculation of the weighted premium of the district. Only this data will
be used for calculation of L1. For new notiﬁed crops, 30% of the average of the last
3 years net sown area, in case of major crops and 10% of the average of the last 3
years net sown area, in case of minor crops will be considered as weights for the
calculation of lowest weighted premium of the district.
7.1.6.1 Bidding shall be done through e-tendering and work order may be released
within 2 weeks of the opening of the Tender.
7.1.6.2 Depending on the risk proﬁle, historical loss cost and cost beneﬁt analysis for the
proposed crop(s) in district(s) of any cluster, if the State Government feels that the
premium rate likely to be offered by the bidding ICs would be abnormally high, then
the State Government can ﬁx a ceiling on premium rates for such crop(s) proposed
to be included in the bidding evaluation for the bidding period. However, recourse to
this ceiling provision may be done only in well justiﬁed cases and not as a general
practice. The ceiling premium rate may be derived based on statistical
evaluation/actuarial premium analysis, loss cost, historical payouts etc. and name
of such crops should be disclosed by the State Government compulsorily in the
tender document.
7.1.6.3 In such cases where a ceiling on premium rate has been indicated, the State
Government must call ﬁnancial bids in a two-step bidding or in two separate
envelopes. The ﬁrst bid/envelope is for disclosing the premium rate offered by
each participating ICs for such ceiling crops and must be categorised undernd
"Ceiling Premium Rate" and 2 bid envelop is for bidding of crop wise premium
rate for all other crops included in tender. Time interval for opening of both
bid/envelope should be compulsorily mentioned in the bidding documents and
should preferably be on the same day. All participating ICs have to submit the bid
offer for both categories of crops as per the procedure mentioned above.
7.1.7 The State Government shall ﬁrst evaluate the ﬁrst envelope of the bid keeping in
view the premium offered by each individual participating IC and if the risk
propensity and weather susceptibility of the crop and/or historical claim/loss data
doesn't support the actuarial rates offered by the participating IC, such crop(s) may
be dropped from the list of proposed crops for notiﬁcation by the State Government
and evaluation for L1 bidder should be done strictly based on the rates offered for
remaining crops. The second envelope shall be opened by the State Government
only after the decision on dropping the proposed crops/or accepting the premium
rates offered by the participating ICs has been taken by the State Government. If
State Government decides not to drop all the proposed crop(s)/ few crops for which
premium rate was obtained in a separate envelope of the "Ceiling Premium Rate"
from the bidding process, then L1 will be calculated by inclusion of the premium
offered for both categories of crops/ﬁnal remaining crops.
7.1.8 All participating ICs will provide loss cost calculation on the NCIP, for
evaluation of the premium rates within 3 days of the opening of the tender.
7.1.9 States should avoid re-tendering as a general practice. Re-tendering may be held
only in exceptional circumstances and only with the prior approval of GoI after
submission of a request with detailed reasons except, in the cases where
re-tendering is necessitated due to inadequate participation of ICs as per the State
bidding evaluation norms. The GoI on its part will give its decision within 5 working
days of the receipt of the request.
www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY 11

7.1.10 States are required to compulsorily upload meeting notices, tender documents,
addendums, corrigendum, notiﬁcation of award, copy of agreement between State
Government and the IC and all other requisite and relevant data and information on
the NCIP for faster communication and response. Accordingly, the subsequent
notiﬁcations, circulars, directives shall also be uploaded on the Portal as and when
issued for wider reach and circulation.
7.1.11 All conditions proposed to be stipulated by State Government should be
incorporated in the bid document itself and no new condition should be included in
the notiﬁcation. In case ICs have any objection to any Tender condition which is in
conﬂict with the guidelines, they can make a reference to the State Government
with a copy to the GoI within 3 days of issuance of Tender.
7.1.12 L1 bidder will not be allowed to withdraw its bid after opening of bids/allotment of
work. If L1 bidder withdraws then ﬁnancial loss, if any, to the State Government due
to re-tendering /assignment of work to others, due to increase in actuarial premium
rate from previously declared L1 rate, shall be recovered from the withdrawing
L1 bidder.
7.1.13 However, state have to issue work order within a month of opening of bid.
7.1.14 Termination of Contract:
Either party shall be entitled to terminate this Agreement under speciﬁc situations
and conditions as mentioned below after ninety (90) days of issuing a written notice
to the other party subject to the condition that if the notice is given within ninety (90)
days prior to commencement of a crop season, the said crop season would be
implemented by the concerned Insurance Company:
• IC is debarred/black-listed by the Insurance Regulatory and Development
Authority of India (IRDAI) or MoA&FW, GoI.
• MoA&FW may also examine the recommendation regarding black-listing of
IC by other competent authorities for taking appropriate decision/compliance.
• IC has failed to maintain the required solvency margin, or the solvency ratio for
the ﬁnancial year as prescribed by IRDAI.
• IC has been de-empanelled by MoA&FW for the implementation of a crop
insurance scheme, as evidenced by the evaluation of performance of Insurer
conducted by the authority prior to the Bid Due Date.
• Failure of the State Government and/or Insurer in performing one's core
responsibility as prescribed in the OGs of PMFBY & RWBCIS including but not
limited to the payment of premium share by the State Government and
payment of claim by the Insurer within the extended timelines.
• Any material changes in the scheme parameters by the Government.
• Termination of agreement by any party due to any other reason not listed
above will attract a penalty of up to 5% of the total premium. The total premium
in this case shall be determined by multiplying the total premium of the
corresponding preceding previous year/season with the remaining
year/seasons of the agreement period.
www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY 12

www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY
7.2 Procedure for Issuance of Notiﬁcation by the States/UTs:
7.2.1 Notiﬁcation of Crops, Areas and Implementing Agency (IA):
7.2.1.1 The Scheme shall operate on the principle of "Area Approach" in the selected
deﬁned areas called IU. The States/UTs will notify crops and deﬁned areas covered
during the season in accordance with the decision taken in the meeting of the
SLCCCI. The States/UTs should notify the Village/Village Panchayat or any other
equivalent unit as an IU for major crops deﬁned at the District / Taluka or equivalent
level. For other crops, it may be a unit of size at or above the level of Village/Village
Panchayat depending on the availability of sufﬁcient crop area for statistically
sound sampling for the conduct of CCEs. For deﬁning a crop as a major crop and
deciding the IU level, the sown area of that crop should be at least 25% of the Gross
Cropped Area in a District/Taluka or equivalent level. And this should be
appropriately incorporated in the notiﬁcation.
7.2.1.2 The States/UTs will notify the type of Risk Coverage opted viz. Basic Cover and
Add-on Covers during the season. For the claims arising out of crop damage due to
localized risks and post-harvest losses, assessment of the crop damage will be
made on an individual farm basis as outlined in (Section 21, Para 21.5 and
21.6 respectively).
7.2.1.3 The SLCCCI, for the purpose of notiﬁcation, will consider factors such as
availability of the past yield data based on CCEs for adequate number of years (at
least 7 years for the calculation of TY), cropped acreage and capacity for estimating
yield during proposed season, etc. The State Government should endeavour to
cover all the major crops grown in all the districts of the State. States should ensure
that a standard methodology of yield estimation exists for all the crops proposed to
be notiﬁed (refer Claim Calculation Methodology at Section 18, 19 & 21).
7.2.1.4 The States/UTs should provide all information and data as mentioned above
(Para 7.1.5) in soft format (in Excel) in English to the ICs for the calculation of
TY, premium rates etc. at the IU area as detailed in Model Tender Document
and in its absence, use the data at the next higher unit/nearest neighbouring
unit/weighted average of contiguous units, as decided by the SLCCCI. The level
and the name of a notiﬁed area of IU must be a part of the notiﬁcation and should be
provided at the time of bidding itself.
7.2.1.5 In case States/UTs propose to notify irrigated and un-irrigated(rainfed) areas under
a crop separately, they shall ensure that minimum CCEs are planned and
conducted for irrigated and rainfed crops separately in such areas. In addition, past
yield data for requisite number of years will have to be made available separately
for both. In case village is the IU, for better representative sampling of CCEs and to
avoid moral hazard, notiﬁcation of both irrigated and rainfed crops in the same IU
should be avoided.
7.2.1.6 While notifying the crop(s) where a speciﬁc conversion factor is being used for
reporting of yield such as in the case of rice/paddy etc, due care should be taken by
the State Nodal Department to use the relevant speciﬁc nomenclature for
disclosure of average yield, TY and actual yield while releasing the tender
document and submission of yield data and CCE data for the calculation of
admissible claims. The IC will also be responsible for prior scrutiny of the Tender
document. Information/data provided in the Tender document will be treated as
ﬁnal and in case of any error/ misreporting/disparity, the State Government and the
IC will be equally liable for payment of additional claims arising on account of it,
if any.
13

7.2.1.7 For the current season or subsequent seasons (in a multi-year contract), the
States/UTs, if required, can notify additional IUs or de-notify certain IUs subject to
maximum deviation of 10% of the already notiﬁed IUs for the crop within a district at
the same premium rate, before the cut-off date for debit of premium. If the deviation
is >10% or in case of addition of a new crop, the actuarial premium rate may be
based on the calculation of weighted average premium rate as prevalent in
contiguous districts or by applying appropriate loading on the existing premium
rate. The rates for such crops will be determined /veriﬁed by the TSU and its
decision will be binding on both States and ICs.
7.2.1.8 In case of creation/re-organization of any new IU/Districts by the State Government
after the ﬁnalization of tender, it shall be included in the scheme with the same
terms and conditions as parent IU/Districts from the next season within the contract
period. In case an IU moves out of a district to be part of another existing district
then concurrently corresponding district (the district in which IU is moving) rates will
be applied. In case of formation of a district by re-organizing a portion of more than
one district then weighted average premium rate for each notiﬁed crop will be
determined by considering the last season's insured area for the concerned part of
district as weight.
7.2.1.9 States implementing PMFBY at the Village/ Village Panchayat level for major
crops shall be entitled for 50% reimbursement of incremental expenses of
CCEs and the cost of smart phones/ improved technology from the GoI. Only
eligible items will be considered for reimbursement. The data source for calculation
of admissibility of incremental CCEs will be the NCIP.
7.3 Notiﬁcation of Indemnity Level, Average Yield and Threshold Yield:
7.3.1 Scheme provides for adoption of three levels of Indemnity, viz.,70%, 80% and 90%.
State Government in consultation with the SLCCCI shall ﬁnalize the indemnity
levels for notiﬁed crops at the district level and the same will be provided in the
tender document. The TY shall be notiﬁed in the Tender for the current season and
the same will be used for claim calculation for that season. The Average Yield of a
notiﬁed crop in IU will be the average yield of the best ﬁve years out of the last seven
years. The TY of the notiﬁed crop is equal to the Average Yield multiplied by
the Indemnity level. The TY for any crop and IU shall as declared in the tender
document issued by the State should compulsorily be part of the notiﬁcation
for the season/contract period and shall not change at any point during that
season/year/contract period.
7.3.2 The Indemnity level of the district crop combination should be prescribed in the
tender and will remain the same during the entire contract period. In case of
re-organization/creation of new districts, similar provisions as detailed in
Para 7.2.1.8 will be applicable. In case of formation of new district by re-organizing
portions of more than one existing districts, then weighted average indemnity level
by considering the last season area insured of each notiﬁed crop as weight with
rounding-off to the nearest Indemnity level deﬁned under the OG will be the
applicable Indemnity level. This will be applicable for the tender duration only.
7.3.3 The calculation and notiﬁcation of TY - For calculation of TY, historical average yield
of the best ﬁve out of last seven years shall be considered. Further TY should be
deﬁned only at the notiﬁed area level and once included in the notiﬁcation issued by
the State, it should not be changed at a later stage under any circumstances.
In case of multi-year contract, the TY for the subsequent years shall be adopted
choosing one of the following methods for computation:
www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY 14

7.3.3.1 Fixed TY - TY as derived from the best 5 of the immediate last 7 years crop yield
data and notiﬁed indemnity level, will remain unchanged for the entire contract
period. The premium rates quoted by ICs will remain unchanged for the entire
contract period. It is described in the Illustration 1 below-

Illustration 1: Fixed TY
Assumption:
If past 7 years yield at Insurance unit level are as below:
Threshold Yield:
TY calculated as per formula prescribed in Revised OG:
Formula = [(ƩBest 5-year Yield) X Notiﬁed Indemnity level] ÷ 5
Under this method the TY calculated in year 1 will remain constant across IUs
during the entire contract period as illustrated in the table below:

Premium Rate
Under this method Premium rate quoted by The IC in ﬁrst year will remain same
throughout the tender period. For example, if the premium rate quoted by
insurance company for a district crop combination is 13% and then it will remain
13% for the entire contract period as illustrated in the table below:
Evaluation of tender process and determination of L1 Company:
Under this method, every IC will quote premium rate for each district crop
combination notiﬁed by concerned State/UT. L1 will be determined on the basis of
lowest weighted average premium rate considering last corresponding season's
area insured as weights for all crops combined for that cluster.
7.3.3.2 Laddered TY - If the district level average change in yield for a crop over
immediately preceding 7 years is negative then ﬁxed TY mentioned as in Para
7.3.3.1, above shall apply. Otherwise, immediately preceding 7 years district level
average growth rate in yield will be used to ﬁx the TY for each of the subsequent two
seasons of all concerned IUs for these seasons within the contract period and
same shall be pre-notiﬁed at the time of tender itself. IC shall quote one rate of the
premium for all the seasons accordingly. Lowest bid shall be determined
considering last year's insured area as detailed in Para 7.2. To ensure clarity in the
understanding two illustrations II & III have been provided below:
www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY
Year
Indemnity Level
Threshold Yield
2020
70%
1267
2021
70%
1267
2022
70%
1267
Year
Premium Rate
2020
13%
2021
13%
2022
13%
15
Year 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019
Yield 1500 1700 1600 1900 1850 1400 2000

www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY
*Note - District level average yield is a crop speciﬁc simple average of yields across
the IUs in a district. The above exercise is to be performed for each crop notiﬁed in
a district.
Illustration 2: Laddered TY- Negative growth rate in last 7 years yield
Assumptions
If last 7-year district level average yield of a crops notiﬁed is as:
Indemnity Level-70%
Threshold Yield:
Here, average yield growth rate in last 7 years = - 3.27% as calculated below:
[(1000/1000-1)+(1600/1000-1)+(1900/1600-1)+(1850/1900-1)+(1400/1850-1)
+(400/1400)-1)]/6
In this case since average growth rate in last 7years yield is negative, TY will
remain constant for the concerned crop across IUs, across the contract period
as below:
Note1 - Yield for each Crop to be notiﬁed in a district needs evaluation and check for
its growth rate to set-up TYs for different years in a contract period.
Note2 - Please note that TY needs is to be calculated at IU level with the data
related to respective IUs.
Premium Rate:
It will remain same across the contract period like Illustration I.
Evaluation of tender process and determination of L1 Company:
Under this method, every insurance company will quote the premium rate for each
district crop combination notiﬁed by State Government. L1 will be determined on
the basis of lowest weighted average rate considering last year insured area
as weight.
Illustration 3: Laddered TY- Positive - growth rate in last 7 years yield
Assumptions
District level average yield considering yield of all crops notiﬁed is as below:
Year 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019
Yield 1000 1000 1600 1900 1850 1400 400
Year
Indemnity Level
Threshold Yield
2020
70%
1085
2021
70%
1085
2022
70%
1085
Year 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019
Yield 1000 1000 1600 1900 1850 1400 1200
16

www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY
Indemnity Level-70%
Method
Average Yield growth rate in last 7 years = 6.25% as calculated below:
[(1000/1000-1)+(1600/1000-1)+(1900/1600-1)+(1850/1900-1)+(1400/1850-1)
+(1200/1400)-1)]/6
In this case since average growth rate in last 7-years yield is positive (6.25%).
Threshold yield of each IU for that crop will vary with the same growth rate as below:
Note1- Yield for each Crop to be notiﬁed in a district needs evaluation and check for
its growth rate to set-up TYs for different years in a contract period. There may be a
case that some crops in a district will have constant TY (as shown in illustration II)
and some stepped- up TY as shown in illustration III.
Note2- Please note that ﬁrst year TY (of a crop) needs to be calculated at IU level
with data related to respective IUs. IInd and IIIrd year TY of different IUs need to be
calculated with incorporation of TY growth rate as explained above.
Note3- Yield growth rate in preceding 7 years must be considered up to 2
decimal places.
Premium Rate
It will remain same across the contract period like Illustration I.

Evaluation of tender process and determination of L1 Company:
Under this method, every IC will quote the premium rate for each district crop
combination notiﬁed by the State Government. L1 will be determined as the
company having lowest weighted average rate considering last year insured area
as weight.
7.3.3.3 Variable TY - In this case, TY of a crop in an IU may be computed every year after
incorporating the actual crop yield of the previous year. For premium rate
determination, increase/decrease in TY will be determined by considering district
level weighted average yield (assuming last year insured area as weight) of a crop.
The premium rate shall be increased/decreased as per mechanism detailed in the
table below:
Year
Indemnity Level
Threshold Yield
2020
70%
1113
2021
70%
1183
2022
70%
1257
Corresponding Increase/ Decrease in APR against each 1% point
Increase/Decrease in TY
APR Grid
Premium Range
0%<=APR<5%
Indemnity Level
70%
4.65%
80%
5.80%
90%
6.90%
17

www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY
In case of extreme circumstances wherein application of prescribed change
in rates as above result in negative premium rate, the TSU will work out the
rates. Worked-out rates by the TSU after the approval of DAC&FW will be
acceptable to all concerned stakeholders.
Illustration 4: Variable TY
Assumptions
District level weighted average yield (last year's area insured as weight) of
a notiﬁed crop
Indemnity Level =70%
Premium rate quoted by L1 Insurance Company for a district crop
combination =13%
Year 2020 TY (Notional at district level) is calculated as per existing formula (using
data given in 1st assumption) and TY for year 2021 and year 2022 are just assumed
for illustration.
Method
Growth in District level Threshold Yield:
Year 1: 0%
Year 2: 1225 / 1183 - 1 = 3.55%
Year 3: 1155 / 1183 - 1 = -2.37%
Note: In year 1 there would not be any change in TY as it will be known to Insurance
company during tender process.
Year 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019
Yield 1500 1700 1600 1800 1850 1400 1500
Year
Threshold Yield
2020
1183
2021
1225
2022
1155
Corresponding Increase/ Decrease in APR against each 1% point
Increase/Decrease in TY
APR Grid Indemnity Level
5%<=APR<10%
10%<=APR<15%
15%<=APR<20%
20%<=APR<25%
25%<=APR<30%
APR>=30%
2.80%
1.70%
1.20%
0.95%
0.75%
0.65%
3.45%
2.10%
1.50%
1.15%
0.95%
0.80%
4.15%
2.50%
1.75%
1.40%
1.15%
0.95%
18

Variation in Premium Rate:
Year 1 =13%
Year 2 = 13%*(1+(3.55*1.7%)) = 13.78%
Year 3 = 13%*(1+(-2.37*1.7%)) = 12.48%
Note1 - Please note that district level Threshold yield has been calculated notionally to
calculate changes in Actuarial Premium Rate (as premium rates are quoted at district level)
and have no other relevance.
Note2 - Since premium rate is quoted for each district-crop combination, the above
exercise needs to be performed for all the crops notiﬁed in a district.
Evaluation of tender process and determination of L1 Company:
Under this method, every IC will quote premium rate for each district crop
combination notiﬁed by State Government. L1 will be determined as company
having lowest weighted average rate considering last years area insured
as weight.
Actual Premium Rate (APR)
Note1 - Please note that TY may vary at IU level but for premium rate
determination, weighted average yield (considering the last year insured area as
weight) at the district level for respective crops will be considered.
Note2 - These factors of increase/decrease have been ascertained independent of
crop /region and reﬂect the country level impact due to changes in TY. There may
be different levels of impact on burn cost at the district/regional level due to
variations in TY, however, to simplify and considering the ease of implementation, it
has been standardized.
In this case the States/UTs would have to provide IU level crop yield data well in
advance so that the revised TY and premium rate could be calculated and notiﬁed
before starting of the new season.
In case of unavailability of latest season yield data, the prior season yield
data can be used for pricing, however, base TY will not be allowed to be
changed even if the latest data is made available post tender conclusion.
While adopting any one of above three methods, the following assumptions
and limitation of these methods may be taken note of:
i. Model using past data may not be a true reﬂection of future events.
ii. Standardized rates prescribed above may not exactly reﬂect the risks inherent
in speciﬁc district crop combination.
iii. This model is subjected to spurious accuracy in certain cases.
iv. Increase/ Decrease in TY is being tested at the district level, but TY can vary at
the IU level and therefore have an element of approximation.
v. Increase/ Decrease in rates are calculated by the expected loss ratio of 80%.
vi. As with all statistical/mathematical models, this method is also subject to
modelling error.
www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY 19

vii. Prescribed changes in premium rate is calculated considering mid-point of
each APR range band except in 0-5% range wherein it is calculated at 4.5%.
viii. This model assumes normality in yield data and therefore subject to an
element of error in case of departure from normality.
7.3.4 In exceptional cases, where the last corresponding season yield data is not
available at the time of Bidding, yield data is to be provided before the harvesting of
the current season. However, the yield data upto last to last corresponding season
should be provided at the time of bidding itself. In such cases admissible claims will
be anyway calculated on the basis of data available at the time of bidding.
7.4 Notiﬁcation of Sum Insured
The States/UTs need to choose either the Scale of Finance or Notional Average
Value (Notional Average Yield x Minimum Selling Price (MSP) / Farm Gate Price)
(Farm gate price will be considered for the other crops for which MSP is not
declared) method for calculation of Sum Insured for a district-crop combination for
the entire period of contract. The crop-wise sum insured notiﬁed in the ﬁrst
year/season could be changed in the subsequent year/season as per the change in
the Scale of ﬁnance or the MSP/ Farm gate price as available for the notiﬁed crop
and decided upon by the State. However, change in the sum insured over a year
due to the change in the Scale of Finance/farm gate price will be capped at 10%
every year.
7.5 Notiﬁcation of Seasonality discipline:
7.5.1 States / UTs in accordance with the broad seasonality deﬁned/prescribed in these
OGs shall also notify the seasonality discipline for various activities under the
Scheme viz. submission of insurance proposals/application, consolidated
declarations by banks, remittance of premium to ICs, uploading of individual
covered farmer's data on NCIP, submission of yield data, claim assessment of
losses for (i) standing crop (ii) localized calamities, (iii) prevented sowing, (iv)
post-harvest losses, (v) On-Account payment for major calamities, etc as per the
provisions of the Scheme.
7.6 Notiﬁcation of Automatic Weather Stations (AWS):
7.6.1 Only those AWS/ARGs of IMD/State Government /private agencies should be
considered and notiﬁed which are as per standards deﬁned by IMD/WMO and are
certiﬁed and approved by the IMD/any agency notiﬁed by the State/Central
Government. These must be optimally operational and be able to provide real time
weather data. The AWS/ARG of private agencies should only be considered in the
absence of properly functioning AWS/ARGs of IMD/ State Government AWS /ARG
data sourced for crop insurance should be transferred on real time basis to the
NCIP for calculation of admissible claims. The detailed guidelines for this have
already been uploaded on the NCIP.
7.6.2 State can explore the possibility of creating a dense AWS/ARG network on Public
Private Partnership (PPP) Mode for which the GoI will provide 50% of the viability
gap funding.
7.6.3 The following data sources may be used for validation of on-account claims and
claims for prevented sowing:
• Satellite/UAV Remote Sensing Data.
• AWS/ARG Data.
• Mahanalobis National Crop Forecast Centre (MNCFC) Report/Study on
drought assessment.
www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY 20

www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY
7.6.4 State shall notify the concerned weather data provider/ expert agency whose
report/ methodology would be used in assessing the extent of losses and
computation of claims. Cost of such weather data for PMFBY shall be borne
by the concerned IC. However, in case of requirement of data for resolution
of disputes, cost of weather data will be borne by the concerned stakeholder
raising the dispute. The normative cost of procurement of weather data will
be ﬁxed by the GoI to address the grievance of abnormally high rates
charged in certain instances. The notiﬁed AWS and ARG should fulﬁll/ meet
the standards/ norms/ criteria speciﬁed by IMD/other concerned authorities
from time to time.
100
8. Engagement of Common Service Centres (CSCs) and Other
Intermediaries for coverage of Non-Loanee Farmers:
8.1 The CSCs under Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology (MeITY) have
been engaged to enrol non-loanee farmers. Nodal agency for engagement with
MOA&FW and ICs will be CSC-SPV, a company established under MeITY for
carrying out e-governance initiatives for the GoI. All empanelled ICs will
compulsorily be required to enter into an agreement with CSC-SPV for the
enrolment of non-loanee farmers and for the provision of other deﬁned services to
farmers and pay service charges as ﬁxed by the MOA&FW, GoI.
8.2 All applications of one unique farmer of one village for a particular season and
Scheme to be considered as one unit for the payment of service charges. No other
agreement or payment is required to be made for this purpose.
8.3 No charges/fee shall be borne or paid by the farmers being enrolled through CSCs
i.e. CSC-SPV and Common Service Centre - Village Level Enterpreneur
(CSC-VLE). This information should prominently be displayed by the concerned
CSC-VLEs on their notice board, clearly visible by all visitors. Strict action will be
taken against any CSC-VLE charging any fees from the farmers.
8.4 Any payment deducted from the wallet of CSC-VLE against the PMFBY/RWBCIS
policies cannot be refunded without reconciliation with the Central Portal team. The
amount received against the successful policies on NCIP will be transferred to the
concerned IC next day of the transaction (T+1). Difference between the amount
received by CSC-SPV on day T and the amount pertaining to successful policies
(day T) will be reconciled within next 7 days. Delay in remitting the aforesaid
premium amount beyond 7 days will attract a penal interest as decided by the GoI
based on the default period.
8.5 While accepting the application from the individual farmers CSC-VLE will explain
the provisions and requirement of documents along with consequences of wrong
submission of information/documents to the farmers and further take due care that
all the documents submitted by farmers are properly scrutinised, veriﬁed and
uploaded on NCIP in legible form to avoid any anomaly in the coverage of that
particular farmer by the IC.
8.6 As per the IRDAI circular, no separate qualiﬁcation/certiﬁcation will be required for
the CSC-VLEs to facilitate enrolment of non-loanee farmers. However, proper
training/ capacity building program should be arranged for them by the
stakeholders including CSC-SPV. The Banking Correspondent (BC) associated
with the designated branches of the rural ﬁnancial institutions including the public
sector banks ﬁnancing KCC/Agriculture short term loans at subsidized interest rate
are also authorized to collect the applications/premium from the desirous
21

www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY
non-loanee farmers similar to CSC-VLE. Creation of login credential on the NCIP
and approval of such eligible BCs should compulsorily be done by the branch head
of the concerned bank branches. The activities including undertaking of business
by such BCs are to be monitored by the bank branches and responsibility of
irregularities if any will lie with the bank. Other designated enrolment intermediaries
may be empanelled and linked with the NCIP in due course as and when such new
channels are approved by the MoA&FW for the enrolment of farmers.
8.7 Empanelled ICs have to necessarily register all licensed insurance
agents/insurance intermediaries engaged for enrolment of non-loanee farmers in
the beginning of each season within 10 days of the award of work in the State on
NCIP and submit the list and details of such agents/intermediaries to the concerned
Nodal department of the State Government. Further all agents/intermediaries have
to work strictly as per the provisions of the Scheme and IRDAI regulations.
9 Electronic Remittance of Funds:
9.1 The GoI and State Government will endeavour to utilize Public Financial
Management System (PFMS)/PFMS linked systems to remit the funds to the State
Government/ICs/agencies.
9.2 Banks, CSC-SPV and other Insurance Agents/intermediaries are required to remit
the consolidated premium payment to respective ICs mandatorily through the
Payment gateway of NCIP or payment challan generated through NCIP within the
stipulated date. The remittance of the premium should compulsorily be done within
the cut-off date stipulated for the enrolment agencies. Bank details of ICs shall be
made available on the Challan/Portal itself. The applicable service charges for
remittance of premium amount through payment gateway shall be borne by
the payer i.e. Banks, Insurance Agents/Intermediaries, and Farmers
enrolling themselves through NCIP. Presently, the payment gateway charges
Rs 5/- + applicable GST (i.e. Rs. 5.90/-) per transaction.
9.3 To adjust the variance in the remitted premium due to rounding off by the banks and
the Insurance agents/intermediaries to the respective ICs through the payment
gateway of the NCIP, no action is required if this amount is plus / minus Rs. 10/-.
However if the amount exceeds Rs. 10/- then banks and the Insurance
agents/Intermediaries are allowed to remit a maximum amount of Rs. 100/- to the
respective ICs through the payment gateway of the NCIP in order to cover the
aforesaid shortfall beyond the stipulated premium remittance cut-off date upto
reconciliation.
9.4 All ICs will maintain only one bank account for crop insurance business throughout
the Country for premium credit including farmers share, state share and central
share of subsidy from all concerned stakeholders. This amount will only be used for
premium purpose and no other money can be credited to this account. The ICs will
upload account statement of this account on the NCIP of the preceding month byrd
the 3 of the next month to ensure easy and quick reconciliation.
No remittance/ﬁnancial transaction in the form of Banker's cheque/Demand
Draft will be allowed.
9.5 The ICs will be provided login access to the essential crop notiﬁcation
data/information along with farmer level coverage data including banking details of
individual farmers on the Portal to reconcile, verify, validate and calculate payable
claims and remit the same directly into pre-declared bank accounts linked to the
NCIP through PFMS. There is no need of separate KYC process at the time of
payment of claims by the ICs as the requisite details such as Aadhaar number, land
record details, address etc have been captured at the time of enrolment itself.
22

www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY
9.6 Aadhaar Enabled Payment System (AEPS) to be used as primary source of
payment of claims for enrolment done through all sources except Banks.
10 Census Code Mapping of Entities:
10.1 All States/UTs shall update census codes of their villages with the higher
administrative/revenue units like Gram Panchayat, Firkas, Patwar Circles,
Revenue Circles, Hoblis, Mandals, Blocks, Tehsils, Talukas, Districts as well as of
Automatic Weather Stations/Backup Weather Stations. Only revenue
classiﬁcation will be considered. This will create a standard mechanism of
mapping and identiﬁcation across the country.
10.2 States/UTs are advised to adopt the Revenue Hierarchical System under PMFBY
and RWBCIS and accordingly will update the village master to facilitate notiﬁcation
on portal. However, for time being States/UTs will ensure that for notiﬁcation of
Hierarchical System i.e. Revenue System or Administrative System for PMFBY
and RWBCIS should be same to facilitate the uniform database for further reporting
and analysis.
10.3 Further, for purposes of obtaining accurate location, State must also provide Geo
coded (latitude & longitude) village maps in digital format for SST/optimization of
CCEs and integration with other Apps like CCE Agri App, Crop Insurance App, Loss
reporting/Assessment App etc.
11 Digitization of Land Records:
11.1 Under the Central Sector Scheme of Digital India Land Record Modernisation
Program (DILRMP) majority of the States have digitized their land records. To
address the problems of over insurance and acreage discrepancy, States are
advised to integrated their digitized land records with the NCIP so that the individual
land records of farmers can be accessed through the NCIP for crop insurance. This
will help the Government to reach and identify individual beneﬁciaries and bring
utmost transparency and authenticity in beneﬁt transfer.
12 Sum Insured /Coverage Limit:
12.1 States/UTs need to choose either the Scale of Finance or Notional Average Value
(Notional Average Yield * MSP/Farm Gate) price method for computation of Sum
Insured for a district-crop combination for the entire period of the contract. The
crop-wise sum insured notiﬁed in the ﬁrst year/season could be changed in the
subsequent year/season as per the change in the Scale of ﬁnance or MSP/ Farm
gate price as available for the notiﬁed crop and decided upon by the State.
However, any change in the sum insured over a year due to changes in the scale of
ﬁnance/farm gate price will be capped at 10% within the contract period. The sum
Insured for individual farmer is equal to the Scale of ﬁnance or Notional Average
Value (NAYxMSP/Farm Gate Price) per hectare multiplied by the area of the
notiﬁed crop proposed by the farmer for insurance. Area under cultivation shall
always be expressed in hectare.
12.2 In cases where crops are separately notiﬁed under irrigated, rainfed category by
the States/UTs, the Sum Insured value for irrigated and rainfed areas should be
separately indicated.
23

www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY
13 Premium Rates and Premium Subsidy:
13.1 The Actuarial Premium Rate (APR) would be charged under PMFBY& RWBCIS by
implementing Insurance Company. The rate of premium payable by the farmer will
be as per the following Table 1:
*Note: Premium paid by non loanee farmers should be rounded off to nearest Rupee.
Payment of Government Subsidy:
All farmers enrolled under the scheme would be entitled for admissible subsidy on
the Actuarial Premium.
13.1.1 The difference between Actuarial Premium Rate (APR) and the Rate of Insurance
premium payable by farmers shall be treated as the Rate of Normal Premium
Subsidy, which shall be shared equally in 50:50 ratio by the Centre and States/UTs
in all States/UTs except North Eastern Region (NER) where subsidy sharing
pattern between the Centre and States will be in the 90:10 ratio.
13.1.2 The full GoI share in the premium subsidy as per sharing pattern in Para 13.1.1
above will be applicable only upto APR of 25% and 30% with respect to irrigated
and rainfed areas/district, respectively. For APR beyond those rates, GoI share of
subsidy will be limited to the applicable share upto the APR of 25% & 30% for
irrigated and rainfed districts respectively. The applicability of APR for
irrigated/unirrigated districts will be on the basis of the data published by
Directorate of Economics and Statistics (DES), DAC&FW and revised from time
to time.
13.1.3 For the purpose of categorization of Districts between Rainfed and Irrigated,
districts having 50% or more of the Gross irrigated area will be categorized as
Irrigated. The list of the districts along with percentage irrigated area is available on
the NCIP and will be updated in consultation with DES, MOA&FW from time to time.
13.1.4 However, the States/ UTs are free to extend additional subsidy over and above the
normal subsidy from their budget. In other words, additional subsidy, if any shall be
borne entirely by the State/ UT. Subsidy in premium is allowed only to the extent of
notiﬁed Sum Insured.
13.1.5 The Government premium subsidy to the Private empanelled ICs may be routed
through Agricultural Insurance Company (AIC) or any agency designated by the
GoI strictly as per the guidelines/order of the GoI. This may be reviewed later by
Central Government and changed accordingly if necessary. Accordingly, AIC/ other
All Food grain and Oilseeds crops
(all Cereals, Millets, Pulses and
Oilseeds crops)
Season
Kharif
Rabi
Kharif and
Rabi
All Food grain and Oilseeds crops
(all Cereals, Millets, Pulses and
Oilseeds crops)
Annual Commercial/ Annual
Horticultural crops
Perennial horticultural / commercial
crops (pilot basis)
Crops
Maximum Premium Rate
payable by farmer
(% of Sum Insured)*
2.0% of SI or Actuarial rate,
whichever is less
1.5% of SI or Actuarial rate,
whichever is less
5% of SI or Actuarial rate,
whichever is less
5% of SI or Actuarial rate,
whichever is less
24

www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY 25
designated agency is empowered to call/ collect all requisite information related to
implementation of the Scheme and utilization of Government funds and to share
the same with the Government for better planning, implementation and monitoring
of the Scheme. The premium subsidy will be routed through PFMS/PFMS linked
systems strictly based on the Management Information System (MIS) generated
through NCIP.
13.1.6 Government both Centre and State, will release their share of advance subsidy
(First Instalment) equivalent to 50% of 80% of their respective share of subsidy in
corresponding previous season subject to fulﬁlment of General Financial Rule
(GFR)/guidelines in the matter without waiting for coverage details for the
ongoing season.

13.1.7 To facilitate settlement of risks of prevented sowing/ mid-season
adversity/localized Calamity: ICs should release the admissible claim amount to
the beneﬁciary immediately after receipt of farmers premium and advance subsidy
(1st Instalment) and without waiting for release of ﬁnal subsidy (2nd
Instalment) from Government. The premium in respect of affected IUs including
subsidy to enable settlement of claims arising due to above events in respect of all
such beneﬁciaries shall be adjusted from the fund already available with ICs as
advance upfront subsidy (1st Instalment) to facilitate compliance with Section
64VB of Insurance Act/Regulation of IRDAI.
13.1.8 All admissible claims based on Yield data/Post harvest losses will be settled on
receipt of second instalment of Government subsidy to be paid on the basis of
tentative business statistics generated on the Portal after 15 days of the period
speciﬁed for auto approval of applications on the Portal. The remaining
Government subsidy, if any will be paid after reconciliation of all business statistics
for the season on Portal.
13.1.9 All empanelled ICs including private ICs shall provide free access to the
Central/State level agencies including Comptroller & Auditor General (CAG) and its
authorized agencies to verify the accounts and audit in respect to the
implementation of PMFBY/RWBCIS.
13.1.10 In case, the State Government is willing to subsidize full farmers' share of premium,
a token farmer Premium of minimum Re. 1 should compulsorily be charged from
the farmer to facilitate electronic tracking & enrolment reconciliation.
13.1.11 States/UTs shall not be allowed to implement the Scheme in subsequent seasons
(atleast two seasons) in case of considerable delay by States/UTs in release of
requisite Premium Subsidy to concerned ICs beyond a prescribed time limit. st
Cut-off dates for invoking this provision for Kharif and Rabi seasons will be 31th
March of succeeding year and 30 September of that year respectively. However,
State shall have to pay a penalty @ interest rate of 12% per annum beyond three
months of prescribed cut-off date for release of subsidy which shall be deposited in
the Central Government Technology Fund.
14 Budget for Administrative Expenses:
14.1 Upto 3% of the total budget for PMFBY/RWBCIS shall be earmarked by States/UTs
for implementation and monitoring of the Scheme including better deployment of
manpower and infrastructure, administrative expenses, IEC activities, yield/loss
assessment expenses, purchase of weather data, purchase of smart phones,
adoption of new technology, setting up of State Technical Support Unit (STSU),
travelling and contingency fund etc.

www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY
14.2 Government of India has already made provisions for aforesaid activities under sub
heads like Salaries, Domestic Travel Expenses, and Technology interventions,
Ofﬁce Expenses, other Administrative Expenses and Professional Services etc. for
Crop Insurance program under PMFBY/RWBCIS. States should make provisions
and budgetary allocation on similar lines including subhead for incremental cost
of CCEs.
15 Technical Support Unit (TSU)/ CPMU:
15.1 National Technical Support Unit (NTSU) or Central Program Management Unit
(CPMU) has been created at the Central level to provide support and advise on risk
classiﬁcation & rating, research & development of new products, methodology for
loss assessment, legal works, workshop/training & capacity building, along with
the use of technology including innovation/ replication, digitization of
administration of Schemes etc. through NCIP.
15.2 NTSU shall calculate the Loss Cost (LC) i.e. Claims as percentage (%) of Sum
Insured (SI) observed in case of notiﬁed crop(s) in notiﬁed unit area of insurance
during the preceding 10 similar crop seasons (Kharif/ Rabi) along with approximate
APR of the crops proposed to be notiﬁed for the season. The loss cost/premium
rate shall be based on the latest available yield data provided to DAC&FW by the
Concerned States before invitation for premium bidding. This calculation to be
done by NTSU on behalf of DAC&FW is only for ofﬁcial purposes to have
information on the approximate cost to the IC for covering the risks so as to
evaluate the bids in proper perspective.
15.3 NTSU shall also develop a suitable methodology for risk classiﬁcation/premium
rating by using historical yield data, weather data, use and level of
inputs/irrigation/technology in crop cultivation, remote sensing data/information
etc. for standardization of the methodology for risk perception and premium rating
for crop insurance in the country.
15.4 In line with creation of NTSU / CPMU at Central level, all States/UTs implementing
Schemes should also create a separate TSU/PMU at State Headquarter (HQ) level
with sufﬁcient technical experts/staff to ensure proper implementation of the
Scheme. State TSU (STSU) may also opt for members on contractual/temporary
basis or take services of other organizations/research institutes etc as deemed ﬁt.
However, States shall have to allocate a separate budget for running the STSU
(refer Para 14.1 above).
16 Seasonality Discipline:
16.1 The cut-off date is uniform for both Loanee and non-loanee farmers. The District
-wise cut-off dates for different crops shall be based on the Crop Calendar of major
crops prepared in consultation with the concerned State Government/ICAR and
crop division of DAC&FW which has also been published on NCIP
(www.pmfby.gov.in.). If any deviation is observed by the States/UTs from the
aforesaid list, it may be brought to the notice of the DAC&FW for rectiﬁcation, if
required. The SLCCCI, shall besides considering the prevailing agro-climatic
conditions, rainfall distribution/ availability of water for irrigation, sowing pattern etc.
ﬁx seasonality discipline of the coverage and other activities in such a way that it
does not encourage adverse selection or moral hazards. If this is violated by
SLCCCI, GoI may decide not to provide premium subsidy.
16.2 The cut-off date for enrolment of each notiﬁed crop should be based on cropth
calendars of the districts and normally may not be beyond 15 July for Kharif th
season and 15 December for Rabi crops. Preferably notiﬁed crops may be
26

categorized in three seasons Kharif, Rabi & Summer/Zaid crops depending on
sowing period and the cut-off date for enrolment may also be ﬁxed accordingly.
16.3 All States/UTs shall consider to prepone the cut-off dates for Kharif and Rabi
seasons. Advancement of cut-off may help in reduction of premium rates and may
help in reducing ﬁnancial burden on the States.
16.4 The broad indicative seasonality discipline is given in the Table 2 below:
S. No. Activity Kharif Rabi Action to be
taken by
Conduct of SLCCCI meeting to take
decision for notiﬁcation of Crops and
areas, adoption of Level of Indemnity
and to inform crop wise sum insured
etc. for drafting of Tender documents.
th
15
November
st
1 June
Nodal
Department of
States/UTs.
1
Uploading of requisite information/data
on crop insurance Portal and Issuing of
Tender documents.
th
30
November
th
15 June
Nodal
Department of
States/UTs.
2
Finalization of Tender and award of
work by States/UTs.3
st
31
December
th
15 July
Nodal
Department of
States/UTs..
Digitization of notiﬁcation and
downloading/ issuance of notiﬁcation
from NCIP for circulation amongst
stakeholders.
st
31
January
th
16
August
By State/UTs
and
Concerned
ICs.
4
Awareness/ sensitization/training
programmes by State Government
and ICs.
Fromth
15 March
th
15
September5
By State/UTs
and
Concerned
ICs.
6 Start of enrolment of farmers for the
season (as per crop calendar).
Fromst
1 April
Fromst
1 October
All
Stakeholders.
Cut-off date for intimation of change of
insured crop by the loanee farmer.
2 working
days prior to
cut-off date
for debit/
collection of
premium
from
farmers.
2 working
days prior to
cut-off date
for debit/
collection of
premium
from
farmers.
Bank/Loanee
Farmers.7
Cut-off date for opting out of existing
loanee farmers from the scheme for
current/ongoing season.
8
Alteast 7
days before
the
prescribed
cut-off date
for
enrolment.
Alteast 7
days before
the
prescribed
cut-off date
for
enrolment.
Bank/Loanee
Farmers.
www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY 27

Cut-off date for receipt of Applications of
farmers/debit of premium from farmers
account (loanee and non- loanee) by all
stakeholders including banks/PACS/
BCs/CSC/ insurance agent/online
enrolment by farmers etc.
Note: *This is indicative only and district
wise crop calendar will be the ﬁnal
basis to arrive at cut-off date.
9
Upto last
date of
enrolment of
farmers as
notiﬁed by
States for
notiﬁed
crop(s) or up th
to 5 July*
for Kharif
season.
Upto last
date of
enrolment of
farmers as
notiﬁed by
States for
notiﬁed
crop(s) or th
up to 15
December*
for Rabi
season.
Banks/PACs/
CSC/BCs
Insurance
agent/online
enrolment by
farmers etc.
Declaration of Prevented sowing.
Strictly within 15 days from
cut-off date for enrolment st
of farmers i.e 31 July for st
Kharif and 31 Dec
for Rabi.
State/UT
Government /
IC.
10
Cut-off date for generation of challan
and online/electronic remittance of
Premium to respective ICs and
uploading of details of individual
covered loanee farmers on National
Crop Insurance Portal by Bank
branches for which premium has
already been remitted (CBs/ RRBs/
DCCBs/PACS), followed by Short
Message Service (SMS) to all insured
farmers from Portal.
11
Within 15 days of cut-off
date for enrolment of
farmers/debit of premium
for both loanee and
non- loanee farmers i.e. st
31 July for Kharif and st
31 Dec for Rabi.
Banks/
Portal/
ICs.
Cut-off date for generation of challan on
portal and online/electronic remittance
of farmer premium to ICs for non- loanee
farmers by designated insurance
Agent(s)/BCs and uploading of details
of individual covered farmers on Crop
Insurance Portal.
IC s
and their
agents.
12
Within 48 Hours of
receipt of application
& premium.
Within 15 days from the
cut-off date for uploading
of data/information by
Banks/PACS/CSC/Agent/
BCs respectively. for
loanee farmers and within
30 days for non loanee th
farmers i.e. 15 Aug for th
Kharif and 15 Jan
for Rabi for loanee and st
31 Aug for Kharif and st
31 Jan for Rabi for
Non Loanee.
Cut-off date for ICs to accept or reject
the farmer's data on Portal.13 IC s.
Within 7 days from the
date of intimation
by ICs.
Cut-off date for CSCs/Banks/
Intermediary/BCs to correct/update the
paid application intimated by ICs on
Crop Insurance Portal.
CSCs/Banks/
Intermediary/
BCs.
14
www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY
S. No. Activity Kharif Rabi Action to be
taken by
28

www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY
Cut-off date for Insurer to accept the
corrected/updated applications.
Within 7 days from the
date of submission of
correction/updation by
the Bank/CSCs/
Intermediary BCs.
ICs.15
Cut-off date for Banks/ICs to hand over
insurance acknowledgment receipt
to the insured farmer.
Within 7 days from
acceptance of proposal
by concerned IC on Portal.
Banks/ICs for
enrolment
through their
intermediaries.
16
IC s/
NCIP
Team.
Cut-off date for processing of
applications by ICs and auto approval
of application of insured farmers on
crop insurance Portal.
60 days from the cut-off
date for enrolment/debit
of premium from farmers th
i.e. 15 September for th
Kharif and 15
February for Rabi
seasons.
17
Before cut-off date of
enrolment of farmers.
IC s/
GoI /State/
UTs.
Cut-off date for raising bills/requisitions
with supporting documents for release
of advance premium subsidy based on
50% of 80% of respective share of
Centre/State in corresponding
previous season.
18
Within 15
days of
cut-off date
of enrolment
of farmers
i.e. 31st July
for Kharif.
Within 15
days of
cut-off date
of enrolment
of farmers
i.e. 31st
December
for Rabi.
GoI & State
Governments
/UTs.
Release of advance upfront premium
subsidy (First Instalment) i.e. 50% of
80% of respective share of Centre/State
in corresponding previous season.
19
Training and registration of ﬁeld level
workers assigned for conduct of CCEs
and reporting of the same on Crop
Insurance Portal through smart phones/
CCE Agri App.
20
22
th
Upto15
August*

*State/UTs
may ﬁx
earlier dates
for early
Kharif crops.
th
Upto 15
January*

*State/UTs
may ﬁx
earlier dates
for early
Rabi crops.
Designated
Ground Level
ﬁeld
Functionaries/
State/District
Level Nodal
Ofﬁcer.
Registration of mobile number of
representative of ICs for co-witnessing
of CCEs.
st
Upto 31
August*
*State may
ﬁx earlier
dates for
early Kharif
crops.
Uptoth
30
January*

*State may
ﬁx earlier
dates for
early Rabi
crops
IC s.21
th
Upto 15
September*

*These
dates may
be ﬁxed
separately
for each
State/UT.
th
Upto 15
March*
* These
dates may
be ﬁxed
separately
for each
State/UT.
MNCFC.
Cut-off dates for identiﬁcation and
intimation of Areas (Blocks/Tehsils/
Taluks) for Major crops for carrying out
CCEs on 2 step Yield Estimation
Method.
S. No. Activity Kharif Rabi Action to be
taken by
29

www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY
State/UT
Nodal
Department/
MNCFC.
Cut-off dates for identiﬁcation and
sharing of randomly stratiﬁed sample
locations for optimization of CCEs.
th
Upto 15th
Aug-15
September*

*These
dates may
be ﬁxed
separately
for each
State/UT
and be ﬁxed
crop-wise
for major/
minor crops.
th
Upto 15th
Feb-15
March*
* These
dates may
be ﬁxed
separately
for each
State/UT
and be
ﬁxed
crop-wise
for major/
minor crops.
23
a) Uploading of tentative schedule/date
for conducting CCEs (crop-wise/IU wise)
followed by SMS on one day notice
through CCEs Agri-app. ICs are equally
responsible to liaise with district
authorities/ﬁeld workers to ascertain
the schedule.
b) Conﬁrmation of the CCEs
schedule.
At least 7 days before
tentative date for
conducting CCEs.
Via SMS on one day
notice through NCIP.
24
Concerned
Department
of States/UTs
to incorporate
the same in
Notiﬁcation.

Timeline for lodging online complaint
about defaulting CCEs data.
Within 2 hours of conduct
of CCEs through CCE
Co-observation app.
IC s.25
Submission of report of over insurance/
mis-reporting etc to the Government in
the prescribed proforma.
Atleast 15 days before
date prescribed for auto
approval.
26
Approval of district wise crop wise
Actual yield data and uploading
on Portal.
27
29
Nodal
Department
of States/UTs.
28
30
Within one month of
completion of CCEs from
district wise crop wise
speciﬁc cut off dates
notiﬁed by States/UTs
for a notiﬁed crop.
Cut-off date for intimation/ reconciliation/
clariﬁcation of any deﬁciency in Actual
Yield data.
Within 7 days from the
date of uploading CCE
Data from State/UT
Nodal Department, if any.
IC s/
ﬂagged on
NCIP.
Cut-off date for resolution by State
Government on clariﬁcation sought
by ICs/ ﬂagged on Portal.
Within 7
days of
clariﬁcation
sought by
ICs/
ﬂagged
on Portal.
Within 7
days of
clariﬁcation
sought by
ICs/
ﬂagged
on Portal.
State/UT
Government.
Within 15
days of auto
approval of
business
statistics
ﬁnalized
on Portal.
Within 15
days of auto
approval of
business
statistics
ﬁnalized
on Portal.
Cut-off date for raising bills/requisitions
with supporting documents for release
of 2nd Instalment of premium subsidy
based on business statistics ﬁnalized
on Portal/auto approval.
IC s.
IC s.
S. No. Activity Kharif Rabi Action to be
taken by
30

www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY
Release of 2nd instalment of
Government subsidy.
Within 15
days of
receiving
requisition
from ICs
based on
business
statistics
ﬁnalized
on Portal.
Within 15
days of
receiving
requisition
from ICs
based on
business
statistics
ﬁnalized
on Portal
GoI/
States/UTs.31
Auto approval of yield data.
Within one week from
receipt of yield data /reply
to clariﬁcation sought by
ICs by State Government.
GoI/ Portal
Team.32
State/UT
Government/
Tech.
Agencies/
GoI.
Arriving at technology-based yield data
in case of inadequate number of
CCEs/substandard CCEs/ Not approved
by States.
Within two months of
completion of CCEs from
district wise crop wise
speciﬁc cut off dates
notiﬁed by States for a
notiﬁed crop/ After one
month of submission/
approval of yield for claim
calculation by ICs,
whichever is earlier.
33
Sharing of detailed information of claims
with bank branches & other
Stakeholders from crop insurance
Portal.
Within 7 days of approval
of claims by ICs.
Portal/
IC s.34
Timelines for Payment of claims.35
Within 2 weeks from
calculation/auto approval
of claims irrespective of
whether ICs have raised
the bill of 2nd Instalment
of premium subsidy or not.
Payment of ﬁnal government subsidy.
On ﬁnalisation of business
statistics on portal after
completion of approval/
reconciliation for the
season on NCIP.
GoI/States.36
Within a week after
receipt of claims.
Banks/
Farmers/
State
Government/
CSCs.
Sharing of the list of loanee farmers to
whom claims have been paid directly to
beneﬁciary accounts/ Direct Beneﬁt
Transfer (DBT) with banks for
reconciliation of claims amount and to
display the same on their notice board
In case of Non Loanee, reconciliation of
claims, if required, to be done by
enrolling agencies in consultation with
concerned bank/State Government.
37
IC s.
S. No. Activity Kharif Rabi Action to be
taken by
31

www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY
Nodal
Department
of respective
State/UT
Government.
Evaluation of ICs based on performance
Evaluation Matrix for combined Kharif
and Rabi seasons of a particular year.
38
Within month of July
each year. Discussion with
each Insurance Company
to be completed by th
25 July each year and
ﬁnal report to be
submitted latest by st
31 July to MoA&FW,
GoI by States/UTs.
Within 15 days from date of
submission of evaluation
report by the respective
State Government.
MoA & FW,
Government
of India.
Conﬁrmation & Validation on
performance Evaluation done by Nodal
Department for combined Kharif and
Rabi seasons of a particular year.
39
16.5 In case the cut-off date falls on a public holiday or is declared as a public holiday by
the Government or there is disruption of services due to strikes/shut-down etc., the
next working day will be treated as the cut-off date. Concerned States have to take
decision in this regard and send a formal intimation to GoI portal team for
rectiﬁcation on NCIP.
16.6 In case of disruption of services due to natural events beyond human control or
technical/software/network issues with the NCIP the subsequent dates may be
extended by the competent authority of Government of India on the basis of
speciﬁc written inputs from Portal Development and Maintenance Agency.
However due care has to be taken that such extension does not lead to a moral
hazard and misuse of the Scheme and suitable measures should be put forth for
the same accordingly. {Vide letter no. F. No. 13012/02/2016-Credit II (71809) datedth
17 August 2020}.
16.7 Further, in case of three crops / season pattern, a modiﬁed seasonality discipline
keeping in view the overall seasonality discipline prescribed above, shall be
adopted by SLCCCI.
16.8 Keeping in view the speciﬁc nature of crop and scope for catastrophic crop
damage, SLCCCI shall ﬁx seasonality discipline in such a way that it does not
encourage adverse selection or moral hazards and also ensure early
payment of claims to eligible insured farmers. Scheme also has provisions
for claims due to prevented sowing and option to change the insured crop.
Hence, the State Government will take all necessary steps to ensure
enrolment of farmers well within the stipulated time under the Scheme. No
request/relaxation for the extension in the above seasonality/cut-off dates shall be
considered/ granted by MoA&FW, GoI once it is ﬁxed and notiﬁed for the crop
season. However, preponement in cut-off dates shall be considered on a case to
case basis. If any State/ UT extends the above seasonality/ cut-off dates on
its-own, then Central share of premium subsidy shall not be provided for the
concerned notiﬁed crops /areas.
16.9 It may be noted that, under no circumstance, will MoA&FW except under
clause 16.6 or any State/UT extend the cut-off dates for enrolment of farmers.
However, in case the States/UTs decide to do so, it may be done only in
agreement with implementing IC. In such cases, however no central
premium subsidy will be provided for the areas/farmers/crops which are
covered/insured in the extended period and the concerned State/UT has to
bear the entire subsidy liability for the coverage in the extended period.
{Vide letter no. F. No. 13012/02/2016-Credit II (71809) dated 17th Aug 2020}
16.10 In case CCE data submitted through CCE Agri App is not approved within the
stipulated timelines, the same will be approved automatically and used for claim
S. No. Activity Kharif Rabi Action to be
taken by
32

www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY
calculation. In case of non-submission of AY data by the State Government to
implementing ICs within stipulated timelines, Synthetic Yield data arrived using
Technology Based Solutions will be used for calculation of admissible claims and
subsequent settlement of claims to eligible farmers. The cut-off date for submission
of yield data to IC is normally one month after the completion of harvesting of a
particular crop.
16.11 In a situation where total claims have been approved/auto approved, the company
shall be liable to pay claims within 2 weeks of calculation/auto approval of claimsnd
irrespective of whether ICs have raised the bill for 2 Instalment of premiumnd
subsidy or not. Hence, it is advised that Insurance Company raises the bill for 2nd
Instalment of premium subsidy within the timelines. If the release of 2 Instalment
is pending on account of non-submission of bill for claiming the said amount by the
IC, the timelines of payment of claims shall be counted from prescribed date of
release of data and not from date of actual release of subsidy irrespective ofnd
payment of 2 Instalment of subsidy.
16.12 All admissible claims shall mandatorily be paid within the stipulated cut-off date
failing which penal interest @ 12% per annum shall be payable on admissible
pending claims beyond 30 days of uploading AY data on portal/provided in soft
copy by State Government subject to release of applicable subsidy by State
Government.
16.13 Since the yield data is being ﬁnalized by the State Government, the concerned
State Government are advised to calculate the admissible penal interest rate and
inform the concerned IC for payment to the eligible farmers. Non-Compliance by
the ICs may also be reported to GoI for taking further action.
17 Collection of Applications and Premium from Farmers:
17.1 The branches of all scheduled commercial banks, regional rural banks, and
cooperative banks shall act as nodal branches for enrolment of farmers in the NCIP.
The primary agriculture credit societies attached with cooperative bank branches
will enrol the farmers through concerned branches of the cooperative bank. The
concerned Lead bank and Regional ofﬁces/ Administrative ofﬁces of Commercial
banks/RRBs will provide necessary guidelines to the concerned bank branches
and coordinate with them to ensure that all concerned branches compulsorily
generate the payment challan and remit the consolidated farmers premium
electronically/online through payment gateway on NCIP to the concerned ICs and
submit/upload the consolidated requisite proposals/information in the prescribed
format within the stipulated cut-off dates and also upload the details of individual
covered/insured farmers on NCIP. Besides, for the coverage of non-loanee
farmers only, Insurance Company may also use IRDAI approved micro insurance
agents/insurance intermediaries with the prior approval of DAC&FW. The details of
such agents including manpower and infrastructure deployed for the enrolment of
farmers under the scheme should compulsorily be submitted to the State
Government and GoI well before the start of the season for creating their
credentials and subsequent uploading of details of individual insured/covered
farmers on Portal within stipulated timelines.
17.2 Consolidated declaration/ formats to be uploaded/entered electronically by Nodal
Banks/Branches shall contain details about total insured area of the farmers,
number of Loanee and Non-loanee farmers enrolled, Total Premium Amount
remitted, premium remittance Unique Transaction Reference (UTR no.) and Date
of remittance as per the format provided on the NCIP. Banks are required to upload
the insured farmers' data mandatorily on the National Crop Insurance Portal. No
other platform shall be used for uploading/submission of farmers' data. Those
farmers whose data is uploaded on the NCIP shall only be eligible for Insurance
coverage and accordingly the premium subsidy will also be released. In cases
33

where farmers are denied crop insurance due to incorrect/partial/non-uploading of
their details on Portal, concerned Banks/Intermediaries shall be responsible for
payment of claims (If any).
17.3 In order to facilitate timely release of Government subsidy and remittance of claims
to the farmers, entry of detailed information of all insured farmers on NCIP is
essential for all bank branches/PACS/BCs/CSCs/Intermediaries/Designated
Insurance Agents and IC.
17.4 Farmer for one parcel of land will be allowed to enrol themselves from one source of
enrolment (banks, CSC, Insurance Company Intermediaries etc.) for the notiﬁed
crops. If the farmer is having multiple crops on that parcel of land then also he will
go to one source and submit one application for mixed cropping and mention
proportionate area of that parcel under each crop.
17.5 Loanee farmers:
17.5.1 Whenever banks sanction crop loan/KCC forth notiﬁed crop in a notiﬁed
area, the crop loan amount to the extent of notiﬁed Sum Insured for notiﬁed
crop and acreage of individual notiﬁed crop of loanee farmers shall be taken
into consideration for coverage provided farmers have not submitted their
choice to opt out from the scheme, as per seasonality discipline. Based on
seasonality of crop, banks should separately calculate the eligibility of loan amount
for coverage during both Kharif and Rabi seasons based on the Sum Insured and
declared acreage under notiﬁed crops. Disbursing bank branch/PACS will prepare
statement of crop-wise and insurance unit-wise details of crop insurance with
premium as per the seasonality discipline. Loan disbursing bank branch/PACS
shall ﬁnance additional loan equal to the premium amount payable by farmer
for crop insurance.
17.5.2 For insurance coverage of a farmer, Sum Insured amount for a notiﬁed crop will be
notiﬁed and uploaded on the NCIP for the concerned notiﬁed crop and season by
the State/UT. The total Sum Insured of loanee farmer for the season shall be
calculated accordingly. The cut-off date for coverage shall solely be based on the
date of loan sanctioned / renewal of credit limit for the notiﬁed crops for the season
and will be independent of actual date of disbursement/withdrawal of full or part
loan. Farmers availing/renewing the KCC loans for Kharif & Rabi crops after cut-off
date (renew/sanction period) for the season will be eligible for cover under crop
insurance for the next/following crop season subject to the loan being standard
loan and within cut-off-date of premium debit for the season. In order to eliminate
excess insurance and rationalize government subsidy; care should to taken to
ensure that only correct acreage under each declared crop in loan application is
considered for coverage of notiﬁed crop and not the actual total acreage. Banks will
be liable for audit and inspection on account of excess Insurance/leakages of
government subsidy.
17.5.3 All enrolment agencies including cooperative banks/PACS will provide valid
complete account details of farmers account viz. bank account details, Indian
Financial System Code (IFSC) code to enable direct transfer of claims to the
farmers account.
17.5.4 Any reporting of excess acreages under insurance in comparison to the sown
acreage will be liable for initiation of documentary and physical veriﬁcation and lead
to administrative action if gross negligence and malpractice in reporting of
insurance acreage is found at farmer's or enrolment channel's end.
17.5.5 Beneﬁt of add on products viz., Prevented sowing/ On-Account Payment for
Mid-season Adversity/ Localized calamity will be available to only those farmers
who have paid the premium / the premium has been debited from their account
www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY 34

before the damage notiﬁcation by the State Government for invoking this provision
for compensation. Hence, Banks must ensure that they debit farmers premium
next day after the cut-off date of opting out of loanee farmers, failing which banks
will be liable to meet the claim liabilities of uncovered eligible farmers.
17.5.6 Detailed example for Calculation of crop-wise Sum Insured (SI) for the season for
coverage of loanee farmers is given in Table 3 below:

Crop 1 Crop 2 Crop 3 Crop 4 Crop 5 Crop 6
Total Land Ownership
(Ha)
8
Kharif Rabi
Name of Crop Paddy Maize Cotton Wheat Potato Gram
Actual Sown Area (Ha)
under the crop
5 2 1 6 1 1
Area (Ha) declared in KCC
application
2 1 1 2 1 1
Crop Season Kharif Rabi Scale of
Finance /(NAY*MSP/Farm
gate price) (Rs./Ha)

50,000 40,000 60,000 50,000 70,000 30,000
Total Sanctioned Sub limit
for crop cultivation

1,00,000 40,000 60000 1,00,000 70,000 30,000
Season-wise sub limit for
crop cultivation

2,00,000

2,00,000

Additional loan amount for
consumption and
maintenance of machinery
etc (max. Upto 30%)

1,20,000

Total sanctioned loan for
an year 5,20,000
Whether Crops notiﬁed by
State
Yes Yes No Yes No No
Crop wise SI (Rs./Ha) - - SI to be considered for
Insurance /Ha
50,000 40,000
50,000
Total SI to be considered
for Insurance
1,00,000 40,000
1,00,000 SI for Loanee farmers 1,00,000 40,000 - 1,00,000 Farmer’s Share of
Premium 0.02 0.02 - 0.015 - - (% of SI) Premium to be debited
from KCC

2,000 800
1,500 Total Farmer’s Premium
(Loanee)

2,800
1,500

Insured Area through
coverage

2

1

2
Balance Un-covered area
(Ha)* 3

1

4

www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY
Additional premium
(as non - loanee )*

3,000 800 - 3,000 Total Farmer’s Premium

3,800 3,000
Total Premium of Farmers
(both as loanee and
non- loanee)
6,600

4,500

(as non - loanee )*
35

www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY
*Note: The Area which has been left out of coverage as loanee farmer for the notiﬁed crop
can be insured by the farmer as a non-loanee farmer by depositing additional
applicable premium along with required relevant documents.
17.5.7 Crop loans sanctioned through Kisan Credit Cards (KCC) are covered as loanee
farmer and banks shall maintain all back up records and registers relating to
compliance with PMFBY and its seasonality discipline and cut-off-date for
remittance of premium/submitting of coverage details on NCIP. Bank branch will
apportion coverage area among insurable crops, based on acreage mentioned in
loan application or on the basis of actual area sown as declared by the farmer
subsequently.
17.5.8 Bank Branches of Commercial Banks (CBs) and Regional Rural Banks (RRBs)/
Nodal Bank Branch in case of PACS under its jurisdiction shall submit individual
insured farmer's details along with UTR details of premium online through NCIP.
Additionally, consolidated insurance declarations from the Bank Branch/ Nodal
Bank in case of PACS under its jurisdiction, shall be uploaded on NCIP mentioning
the relevant details as per prescribed format within cut off dates, as speciﬁed by
SLCCCI for a particular crop and season.
17.5.9 Different options for entry of details of enrolled farmers on NCIP are available for
bank branches in a more transparent and authentic manner. Bank branch can
upload the details of insured farmers through online application mode. Banks are
required to upload/enter the information continuously without waiting for last day
for premium debit and data entry.
17.5.10 As an alternative, direct integration of Core Banking Solution (CBS) with NCIP has
also been successfully initiated and the same may be used by Scheduled
Commercial Banks (SCBs)/RRBs/District Central Cooperative Banks (DCCBs)
available on CBS for pushing the farmers' details in bulk directly without ﬁlling the
individual farmer's details on web-portal.
17.5.11 The scheme will work on the "Opt-out" mode for the existing loanee farmers. The
farmers can choose not to be enrolled under the Scheme, by giving a signed
declaration as per prescribed format, mentioning his/her unwillingness to
participate in the schemes any time during the year for the upcoming season but
atleast 7 days before the cut-off date for enrolment/debiting premium. If application
is received within 7 days of cut-off date for enrolment, then farmer will be exempted
from enrolment for the next crop season. Farmers can use available
communication mediums for communicating their willingness for "opt-out",
however, they will ensure that their willingness is received and recorded by the
bank within the aforesaid prescribed period.
17.5.12 Banks need to debit farmer's share of premium in the last 7 days upto enrolment
cut-off date. During this period, the banks may also prepare the ﬁnal list of farmers
who have opted out and all eligible loanee farmers to be covered.
17.5.13 In case the farmer has submitted a declaration for opting-out from the scheme for a
season earlier and lately wants to get enrolled under the scheme for the same
season, he will be allowed to do so by submitting a signed "Opt-In" declaration as
per prescribed format mentioning withdrawal of earlier submitted "Opt-out"
declaration and his/her willingness to participate in the schemes any time during
the year for the upcoming season but atleast 7 days before the cut-off date for
enrolment/debiting premium.
36

www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY
17.5.14 Declaration for both "Opting in" and for "Opting out" will have to be submitted by the
farmer in the same bank where they have their KCC/SAO Loan account. Formats
for "Opting in" and "Opting out" are already circulated to relevant stakeholders and
are uploaded on NCIP.
17.5.15 Banks will ensure enrolment of all those loanee farmers who have Opted-in, or
have not submitted declarations for Opting-out upto 7 days before the cut-off date
for enrolment/debiting of premium.
17.6 Non-Loanee farmers through Banks and other channel partners:
17.6.1 All non-loanee farmers desirous of availing crop insurance shall ﬁll up the
application form of the Scheme and submit the same to nearest bank branch/CSCs
or authorized channel partner or insurance intermediary of insurance company.
17.6.2 Loanee farmers who have opted out of the Scheme and want to avail crop
insurance for other crops can ﬁll up application form of the Scheme and submit the
same through Bank branch, CSC, directly on NCIP, other authorized channel
partner or insurance intermediaries of insurance company. In this case the farmer
will be treated as non-loanee farmer.
17.6.3 In case of submission through Bank Branches and their BCs, farmers will submit
duly ﬁlled proposal form in the nearest branch of a CB/RRB/PACS/DCCB or
designated BCs with applicable insurance premium amount and other documents.
Bank Branch may, after completing veriﬁcation of documents, accept or reject the
application. Premium shall be accepted by the bank branch preferably from the
farmer's operational account in the same bank branch itself and the same would be
sent to the concerned Insurance Company within the stipulated time for the
purpose of insurance coverage. It is the responsibility of bank branch to
complete the application of farmer. In case the farmer is unable to ﬁll the
application, bank branch shall be responsible for ﬁlling the application on
farmer's behalf, so that not a single farmer who desires to take crop insurance
coverage is left out from the purview of crop insurance Scheme.
17.6.4 In case of application submitted through CSCs, the farmer will be required to
authenticate herself/himself using Aadhaar for ﬁlling up online application form.
Having a bank account is essential for such cases. In this case, CSC-VLE will
upload all requisite/desired supporting documents on Portal while ﬁlling up the
application form on behalf of the farmer. Applications without requisite documents
would not be considered for insurance coverage and CSC-VLE is responsible for
proper ﬁlling of application form.
17.6.5 CSC/Bank Branch/PACS/designated BCs ofﬁcials will assist the farmers in
completing the insurance proposal form and provide necessary guidance. While
accepting the applications and premium, CSC/Bank Branch/PACS/BCs will be
responsible for veriﬁcation of required documents, eligible sum insured, applicable
premium rate, etc. In case of coverage through PACS, they will consolidate these
particulars and send them directly to respective Nodal Bank Branches which will, in
turn, submit application details online on NCIP and generate crop wise challan
electronically on the Portal, for the e-remittance of consolidated premium using
payment gateway of NCIP within the stipulated time, to IC. Besides CSCs, other
Government/Semi-Government institutions/organizations including Post ofﬁces
are also proposed to be utilized for insurance of non-loanee farmers after their
integration with the NCIP after obtaining approval of competent authorities.
37

17.6.6 Non-loanee farmers could also be serviced directly by any designated agencies,
other authorized channel partners or insurance intermediaries, approved by the
IRDAI for the purpose and they will act as a guide and facilitator where in they will
advise such non loanee farmers about the beneﬁts and desirability of the Scheme
and guide the farmers about procedures; collect requisite premium and remit
individual/ consolidated premium electronically to ICs accompanied by individual
proposal forms and summary details in declaration form and upload details of each
insured farmer compulsorily within stipulated timelines on the NCIP.
17.6.7 While accepting the Proposal and the premium from aforesaid designated agents,
other authorized channel partner or insurance intermediaries approved by IRDAI, it
shall be the responsibility of IC or its designated agents to verify insurable interest
and collect the land records, Aadhaar Number, particulars of acreage, sum
insured, crop sown etc. and applicable contract/agreement details in case of
sharecroppers/tenant farmers. The designated intermediaries shall enter the data
of farmers on web-portal, remit the premium with consolidated proposals within 2
days. However, it is mandatory that the non-loanee farmers serviced by the
designated intermediaries should hold a bank account and Aadhaar Number or
Aadhaar Enrolment Number in order to get insured and the designated
intermediaries will also facilitate remittance of the claim, if payable.
17.6.8 For farmers buying crop insurance through CSCs or online, OTP/Aadhaar enabled
veriﬁcation shall be construed as consent and signature of the applicant for
coverage under crop insurance.
17.7 Non-Loanee Farmers - directly to ICs/Web Portal:
17.7.1 Non-Loanee farmer may submit insurance proposals personally to Insurance
Company with requisite/desired supporting documents and applicable premium
has to be remitted electronically to concerned Insurance Company and details of
UTR/remittance slips should compulsorily be attached with application.
17.7.2 Non-loanee farmer can also submit application forms for getting insurance
coverage through NCIP / Crop Insurance App. For this, farmer can ﬁll up the online
application form available on NCIP (www.pmfby.gov.in) / Crop Insurance App and
pay the requisite premium through payment gateway. As soon as the application is
submitted through the system, an acknowledgement receipt will be generated
along with a unique identiﬁcation number. Additionally, intimation will also be sent
through SMS on registered mobile number of the farmer. In this case, farmer
himself will upload all requisite/desired supporting documents on Portal while ﬁlling
up the application form. Applications without requisite documents would not be
considered for insurance coverage and farmer himself/herself is responsible for
proper ﬁlling of application form.
17.7.3 It is mandatory that Non-Loanee farmers, personally submitting proposals to
Insurance Company or through NCIP, should have insurable interest and submit
necessary documentary evidence as proof as decided by SLCCCI along with
Aadhaar Number or Aadhaar Enrolment Number. The insured farmer will lose the
premium and the right to claim (if any) if the material facts furnished in the proposal
form/application are found to be wrong or incorrect at any subsequent point in time.
17.7.4 Insurance Company retains the right to accept or reject insurance proposal(s)
within 15 days/30 days of receipt of proposal/application for Loanee/Non loanee
respectively, in case proposal/application is incomplete, not accompanied by
necessary documentary proof, Aadhaar Number or Aadhaar Enrolment
Number/Slip or insurance premium the proposal/application will be rejected and
the Insurance Company will fully refund the collected premium to the
proposer/applicant.
www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY 38

17.7.5 In cases where the farmer's application/proposal has been rejected by the
Insurance Company as per the provisions of OGs, farmer's remittance for such
applications must be refunded back to the farmer's bank account with in 45 day of
closure of cut-off date for uploading of data/information by Banks / PACS / CSCs
/BCs / Agent, failing which the Insurance Company will be constrained to accept the
application and pay claims as per normal process.
17.8 Option for change of crop name by the Farmer:
17.8.1 All loanee farmers can change the name of the insured crop from the original crop
indicated in the loan application but such change should be submitted in writing to
the concerned bank branch up to 2 working days before the cut-off date for
enrolment and accordingly their newly proposed crop should be insured. Bank will
ensure that all standard loans (as deﬁned by concerned FIs) sanctioned/renewed
for notiﬁed crops within stipulated cut-off date should be covered if the farmers has
not opted out/opted-in within 7 days before cut-off dates for enrolment/debiting
premium. In case the premium debited earlier was higher, Bank/Insurance
company shall credit/refund the excess premium to farmer's account. In case the
premium debited earlier was less, bank shall debit additional premium.
17.8.2 Similarly, all non-loanee farmers already covered under the scheme before actual
sowing/ planting, based on advance crop planning will also have option to change
the crop. For any reason if a farmer changes the crop planned earlier, he should
intimate the change to Insurance Company, up to 2 working days before the
cut-off-date for enrolment through their enrolment channel such as FIs/channel
partner/ insurance intermediary/directly as the case may be, along with difference
in premium payable, if any, accompanied with sowing certiﬁcate issued by
concerned village/ sub-district level ofﬁcial of the State. In case the premium paid
was higher, Bank/CSC/Insurance Company/Channel Partner will refund the
excess premium as the case may be.
17.9 Declarations/ proposals and debited/collected premium uploaded by Banks/
PACS/BCs after the cut-off date shall be summarily rejected and the liability,
if any, for such declarations shall rest with the concerned bank (ICs for
intermediaries). Accordingly, the data/proposal entry on the National Crop
Insurance Portal will also be stopped after the applicable cut-off date. However, any
dispute in the matter may be resolved at the State/UT level, 1st point of reference
for this matter will be handled by Principal Secretary or designated higher authority.
If any matter is still unresolved, it may be referred to GoI.
17.10 The concerned branches of CBs, RRBs and Nodal branch of DCCBs in case of
PACS will upload the details of individual insured farmers enrolled through them
like farmer's name, father's name, Bank Account number, Aadhaar Number,
village, categories - Small and Marginal/SC/ST/Women, insured acreage, details
of insured land, insured crop(s) etc. as prescribed in online application form.
available on NCIP or CBS integration module and submit the same within
stipulated cut-off date as per the seasonality discipline. However, any dispute in the
matter may be referred to the State Government as mentioned in Para 17.8 by the
concerned Agency/Bank for taking appropriate action within the prescribed cut-off
date for reconciliation of premium by banks with all details.
17.11 ICs shall be responsible to upload requisite information including necessary
documentation in respect of non-loanee farmers enrolled through channel partner
other than CSCs and Direct enrolment on the NCIP within the stipulated date of
coverage of non loanee farmers. All intermediaries shall ensure that the
documentation is complete in all respect before accepting the premium. It is the
responsibility of the concerned ICs to collect/obtain any documentation of the
www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY 39

insured farmers from the bank/FIs/ intermediaries/ agents if necessary for
veriﬁcation/acceptance of risk and also to facilitate the banks/ FIs/ intermediaries/
agents to submit/ upload all requisite documents/information on the NCIP within
timelines.
17.12 ICs should also reconcile the details of individual insured farmers uploaded on the
Portal with the consolidated declaration & challan generated and consolidated
farmers premium remittance through payment gateway of the Portal by each
Bank Branch/Nodal Bank/CSC/other intermediaries within the stipulated date and
any deﬁciency/mismatch may be reported to concerned bank branch/nodal bank.
The Bank Branch/Nodal Bank/CSC/Intermediary should further send/upload the
requisite information in respect of such farmers for whom clariﬁcation has been
sought, immediately within 7 days. If such rectiﬁcation is not done/completed by
Bank Branch /Nodal Bank within the stipulated period, ICs may recommend to take
necessary action to State Government under intimation to Central Government
State Government in consultation with SLBC/Nodal Authorities may recommend
suitable administrative action against such defaulting branch/bank. However,
claims (if any) in such cases of such farmers shall be borne by the concerned
bank only.
17.13 ICs should verify and satisfy themselves about the coverage of farmers/ crops and
give acceptance to the applications submitted by banks electronically through
NCIP. The insured farmer's personal details like AADHAAR Numbers,
Banking Details, Address, Mobile Nos. and all such details prohibited under
RBI, IRDAI or Unique Identiﬁcation Authority of India (UIDAI) Act. shall not be
displayed/disclosed publicly. IC will reconcile the details along with farmer's
share of premium receipt before approaching the Government to release the ﬁnal
rd
instalment of subsidy (3 Instalment) under the Scheme.
17.14 All ICs will compulsorily verify and take necessary action including
approval/rejection of proposal or policy of any farmer through National Crop
Insurance Portal within stipulated date. After stipulated period for reconciliation &
obtaining further clariﬁcation from stakeholders, all pending
proposals/information of insured/covered farmers uploaded on Crop
Insurance Portal will be treated as approved and ICs will forfeit their right for
any further veriﬁcation. However, any losses to the Government including
excess payment of premium subsidy due to delayed/non- veriﬁcation of
data/information of individual covered/insured farmers on crop insurance Portal
will be recovered from concerned ICs only and suitable administrative action may
also be taken against the defaulting ICs.
17.15 IC to follow the process and protocol for processing of application, inception of risk
and processing of claims as detailed in the guidelines to rework or update the
claim amount.
17.15.1 Loan was covered/premium was paid outside seasonality discipline.
17.15.2 Sown area was less than the insured area under a crop in a notiﬁed area
(refer Section 25).
www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY 40

www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY
17.15.3 Different crop other than the declared/insured was sown in the land survey no.
insured.
17.15.4 Survey number insured was not actual crop growing survey no.
17.15.5 Area insured is more than the total land holding of the farmer.
17.15.6 Multiple insurance for same crops grown on same land with multiple insurers or
through multiple banks/intermediaries.
17.15.7 Total Sum insured is more than the notiﬁed sum insured for insured acreage of a
given insured crop.
17.16 Penalty/administrative charges on ICs per application for auto approval and
change in status of application on NCIP will be applicable on incremental basis and
will be notiﬁed separately by GoI. Also penalty will be applicable on ICs if approval
of applications is not done within stipulated time (refer Annexure IV).
17.17 On acceptance of application/proposal by ICs the acknowledgement status is
updated on such application/proposal and is visible to the concerned bank
branches/CSC/Intermediaries on their login and an intimation is sent through SMS
directly to the insured farmers from NCIP. Banks can download acknowledgement
receipt from NCIP using their login credentials and shall ensure distribution of
Acknowledgement Receipt to each insured farmer within 7 days from the
acceptance of applications by the concerned Insurance Company.
17.18 All ICs will send policy details to loanee farmers in the form of Inland Letter Card
(ILC) within a month of cut-off date for acceptance of correct/updated application
on NCIP.
17.19 All Stakeholders should follow all the timelines strictly.
18 Assessment of Loss / Shortfall in Yield:
18.1 Wide Spread Calamities (based on season-end yield):The eligible claims on
the basis of CCEs will be considered only if notiﬁed trigger is breached (Refer
Para 20.2).The Scheme operates on the basis of 'Area Approach'. The Deﬁned
Areas for each notiﬁed crop for widespread calamities, i.e., the insurance unit is the
Village/Village Panchayat or any other equivalent unit for major crops and for other
crops it may be the same unit or a unit of a size higher than Village/ Village
Panchayat level. This is to be decided by the States/UTs. Claims for widespread
crop losses on the basis of "Area Approach" will be decided by adopting the
Two-Step Yield Estimation methodology as per the details in Para 20.2.
Department overseeing the conduct of CCEs will submit yield data as per the
cut-off date decided by SLCCCI, along with results of individual CCEs (conducted
through smart phone using CCE Agri App) on NCIP. The yield data will be
approved/uploaded by the concerned authority/State nodal department and made
available to the IC.
18.2 CCEs shall be undertaken per crop per unit area of insurance for notiﬁed crops*, on
a sliding scale, as indicated in Table 4 below:
41

www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY
Sl. No.
1
2
3
4
Level
District
Taluka/Tehsil/Block
Mandal/Firka/Revenue Circle/Hobli or any
other equivalent unit
Village/Village Panchayat
Minimum Sample Size
24
16
10
4
*Note: Minor crops may be notiﬁed at higher than Village/Village Panchayat level.
18.3 Smart Sampling and Two-Step Yield Estimation:
For major crops across states and with availability of technologies, the following
method of Rationalization of number of CCEs without impacting the quality of
sampling and estimation results will be adopted.
18.3.1 Smart Sampling of CCEs: Technology solutions for rationalization of CCEs based
on homogeneous selection of sample/experimental pilots based on crop health
condition analysed through Remote Sensing and other New Age technological
solutions shall be used for rationalization of number of CCEs.
18.3.2 Two-Step Yield Estimation: Two-Step yield estimation shall be adopted in order
to reduce the number of CCEs to be conducted based on the deﬁned parameters to
assess the crop-health through proxy indicators like weather data, satellite indices,
etc. Based on the indices, areas (Block/Tehsil) will be categorized into normal, mild,
moderate and severe damage category. For areas with normal and mild category;
CCEs will be conducted at a higher level e.g. Taluka/Block whereas for moderate
and severe categories CCEs will continue to be conducted at IU level.
18.4 Modalities for Conducting Crop Cutting Experiments (CCEs):
In order to maintain the sanctity and credibility of CCEs as an objective method of
yield estimation, the modalities mentioned below will be followed:
18.4.1 To bring better transparency and conﬁdence in the data, States shall mandatorily
ensure 100% CCEs through a mobile application specially designed by the GoI for
this purpose. No other application shall be used for reporting of conduct of CCEs.
CCE plots shall be chosen using smart sampling technology for selected crops and
random sampling for other crops and the secrecy of the selected plot should be
maintained until the CCE is actually conducted in order to rule out moral
hazards. States may continue to estimate the crop yield by adopting General Crop
Estimation Survey (GCES) for estimation of production, as recommended by
agriculture statistical commissioner. While conducting CCEs for Loss Assessment,
either through Smart Sampling or Random Sampling, States shall maintain same
procedure and methodology for conducting CCEs as adopted by National Sample
Survey Organization (NSSO) or State Manual for Crop Production estimation for
the remaining activities except the selection of experimental plots under
the Scheme.
18.4.2 In order to provide proper beneﬁts to the farmers and to compensate them as per
near actual loss experience, crop should be notiﬁed at the lowest level i.e.
Village/Village Panchayat as detailed in Para 7.2.5.
18.4.3 State shall strengthen the audit process of the conduct of CCEs, with necessary
checks and balances. Digitizing the CCE process including geo-coding (providing
the latitude and longitude of the CCE location), date/ time- stamping and taking
photographs (of the CCE plot and CCE activity), is a must for all CCEs.
42

18.4.4 Wherever external agencies are proposed to be used by the State Governments
for conduct of CCEs (i.e. CCEs are outsourced), it should be given only to the
registered 'professional/accredited' agencies with adequate experience in the
agricultural ﬁeld activities/yield estimation. It is mandatory for these agencies to
follow the digital protocol as mentioned in the Para 18.4.1. Services of such
agencies may also be utilized for assessment of post-harvest losses and losses
due to localized risks.
18.4.5 District level Steering Committee: State Government shall compulsorily
constitute a Steering committee in each district to plan, conduct and supervise the
CCEs for yield assessment and to provide reports of yield data to the State Nodal
department. The Steering committee should be headed by the District level Head of
the Department/Organisation responsible for conducting CCEs and District
Agriculture/Cooperative ofﬁcers, representatives of NSSO and ICs as members.
The Steering committee will compulsorily associate the representatives of ICs,
NSSO, so that they shall be well informed about each and every activity and obtain
the requisite information about CCE planning, schedule for conducting CCEs,
selection of CCEs plot, sharing of requisite form 2, form 8 etc. and individual CCE
result etc. The Head of Steering Committee will be responsible for uploading all
requisite information on NCIP i.e. CCE schedule, individual CCE report etc. and
imparting training to ﬁeld functionaries responsible for conducting CCEs. Steering
Committee will compulsorily send all their proceedings / minutes etc. to District
Level Monitoring Committee (DLMC) and Nodal ofﬁcer of the State. Concerned ICs
shall compulsorily deploy one well conversant ofﬁcial at the ofﬁce of the Head of the
Steering Committee for at least 3 months of the harvesting period for better
coordination and obtaining the information of CCEs including CCEs Schedules etc.
Concerned ICs shall nominate their representatives in the steering committee well
in advance and also share personal details, contacts, email etc. to the States/UTs
while ensuring that DAC&FW is intimated. It is the responsibility of this designated
ofﬁcer of IC to obtain the plan & detailed schedules of each CCE from the
concerned State Government Ofﬁcers at the Block/Circle level within that district.
District Administration will provide requisite space and logistics at their ofﬁce for the
insurance company ofﬁcial. The nominated ofﬁcial of IC will provide mobile
number, mail id for relevant communication in this regard. State will provide the
granular information to this nominated IC ofﬁcial only. Any delay/ non-receipt of
information will be communicated by the nominated ofﬁcial only in the concerned
district to the steering committee at the earliest but no later than 7 days of the
due/scheduled date. The copy of the reminder to the steering committee will
compulsorily be forwarded to nodal department of the States & GoI. Steering
committee may also form Electronic/Social Media groups for quick communication
about their plan, activities etc.
18.4.6 In instances where required number of CCEs could not be conducted due to
non-availability of adequate cropped area, adverse weather conditions/inadequate
infrastructure etc., the yield estimate for such IUs can be generated by using
methods such as (i) adopting yield estimate of next higher unit, or (ii) adopting the
yield of a neighbouring IU with maximum correlation. Priority of applicability of
aforesaid two methods should be notiﬁed by the concerned States/UTs in the
notiﬁcation itself, failing which the option of yield estimate of next higher unit would
be considered. However, this clause shall only be applicable in unavoidable
situations and shall be limited to only minimal number of IU units. It cannot be made
a general rule to avoid CCEs. Special efforts should be made by the States/UTs to
conduct adequate no. CCEs in all notiﬁed units in order to provide appropriate
beneﬁts to farmers. However, if States failed to submit/approve the CCE data
within prescribed time then claims will be settled based on the yield data generated
using technology.
www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY 43

www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY
18.4.7 Modalities for Conducting CCEs for Multi-Picking Crops:
In case of multi-picking crops e.g. Cotton, Chilly, Tobacco, Tomato, Pea, Fruits
(Mango & Apples) & other crops of similar nature, the following procedure shall be
followed:
18.4.7.1 States/UTs need to, in the beginning, specify the number of required picking for
each crop both for irrigated and un-irrigated (rainfed) conditions. Ideally it should be
as per the NSSO/Indian Agricultural Statistic Research Institute (IASRI) deﬁned
guidelines. If it is not available, States/UTs in consultation with local Agriculture
Universities and concerned ICAR centre may identify the required number of
pickings. However, as number of actual pickings depends on climatic conditions
etc.,hence possibility of further pickings of each picking should compulsorily be
recorded in CCE app and no. of actual picking will be ﬁnal in such cases.
18.4.7.2 If the required number of CCEs have been done but the required number of
pickings have not been done, then for those experiments, statistical factor needs to
be used to extrapolate yield to calculate the ﬁnal yield.
18.4.7.3 Such statistical factor (proportion of picking wise yield) needs to be computed from
well conducted CCEs (with the required number of pickings) from the same Taluka
separately from Irrigated and Un-irrigated (rainfed) condition. At least data of 5 well
conducted CCE should be used for computing the factors.
An Example for Yield Calculation for multi-picking crop is mentioned in Table
5 below:

Note: # The factor has been computed as the ratio of average total yield and average yield
upto that picking.
Crop Experiment no.
Total Yield
(Kg)
P1 P2 P3 P4 ∑P1,P2,P3,P4
Well Conducted CCEs in the Taluka with 4 pickings
Cotton E1 1 1.95 2.1 1.25 6.3
Cotton E2 1 2 1.75 1.4 6.15
Cotton E3 0.75 1.75 1.5 1.5 5.5
Cotton
E4
0.8
1.43
2.15
1.4
5.78
Cotton

E5

0.95

1.85

1.4

0.75

4.95

Average

0.9

1.8

1.78

1.26

5.74

Factor (Total Yield/
Picking Yield)

#
6.373

#
2.128

#
1.282
st
(1 )
CCEs with Less Pickings in any IU within that Taluka
Cotton

1

#
6.373
Cotton

1.2

1.75

#
6.278
Cotton 1.1 1.85 1.57 #
5.795
st nd
(1 + 2 ) st nd rd
(1 + 2 + 3 )
st
E6 (only 1 Picking)
st nd
E7 (only 1 & 2 Picking)
st nd rd
E8 (only 1,2 & 3 Picking)
Picking
1 Yield
(kg)
Picking
2 Yield
(kg)
Picking 3
Yield (kg)
Picking
4 Yield
(kg)
44

18.4.7.4 In case there is dispute regarding large deviation in picking dates, the average
picking dates should be computed from well conducted CCEs at the Taluka level.
Accordingly, the picking dates and numbers will be adjusted. For example, if the
average picking date for second picking in a particular Taluka is in December and
one experiment has shown ﬁrst picking in December, it will be considered as
second picking.
18.4.7.5 If there is no proper CCE (with required number of pickings) even at the Taluka
level, it should be considered that no CCE is available and the procedure deﬁned
in yield dispute SOP (Standard Operating Procedure) should be followed, i.e. yield
should be estimated using technology based approch. In case the
crop has withered and there is no further possibility of having further pickings, the
same shall be recorded compulsorily in the mobile application/CCE-Agri App while
conducting the current picking experiment. In such cases, no multiplication factor
may be used for calculation of AY.
All claims will be settled exclusively on the basis of CCEs based yield data available
on the NCIP. The AY Data at Crop-IU level shall be automatically synchronised with
the NCIP through online CCE mobile application. Once the AY data is available on
the NCIP, the same shall be veriﬁed and approved by the concerned District/State
authorities. For those experiments which were conducted ofﬂine/without mobile
application, the AY data, along with the location information shall be uploaded by
the concerned District administration or State nodal department on the Portal.
However this shall be an exception to be exercised in rare cases and such CCEs
should not exceed 5% of the total CCEs. Actual Yield data through any other mode
other than the NCIP shall not be accepted. If the yield data is not uploaded/
synchronised /approved within pre-deﬁned cut-off date by the concerned
authority/department, the concerned IC, may inform the State Government
/Central Government well in time to take appropriate action.
18.4.7.6 IC should be given complete access to co-witness the CCEs, the digital images of
the CCEs and relevant data in the requisite format (electronic/physical) by the
State Government on a real-time basis. A schedule should be formally
given/shared with nominated representative of ICs in the Steering Committee,
sufﬁciently in advance without fail to help them coordinate with the ﬁeld
functionaries and mobilize their manpower accordingly. For this purpose, the IC
shall permanently station one representative in the Steering Committee at the
concerned district ofﬁce of the dept/ agency mandated to conduct CCEs for proper
day to day liaison (Para 18.4.5). State shall provide necessary space in the
concerned ofﬁce & facilitate sharing of information. However, State may not
provide any documents such as Form-1, Form-2 etc. to the ICs. The ICs may verify
such documents on a sample basis only by visiting their ofﬁce. The State should
provide facility for physical veriﬁcation of documents like Form-1, Form-2 etc. on
request of ICs at their premises.
19 Dispute resolution regarding Yield Data/Crop loss:
19.1 During the earlier years of implementation of PMFBY, various types of yield
disputes were observed, leading to unnecessarily delay in the claim settlement.
Following chart shows the procedures to be adopted in various cases.
www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY 45

Yield Dispute
Less number
or No CCE
CCE Not
Done as per
the
Randomization
Plan
CCE done
but yield
abnormally
high or low
compared to
general crop
condition
Less
number of
pickings or
pickings not
timely
Term of
yield
different
(e.g. paddy
yield vs rice
yield)
Moisture &
Conversion
factor not
given/
assessed
Quality
Checking of
data as per
SOP. If
Quality Ok
data may
accepted
else CCE+
RS+
Weather
In rare cases
State is
allowed to
change, with
proper
justiﬁcation,
if disburse-
ment is not
done
Follow the
SOP
Follow the
protocol in
18.4.7.3
NSSO
Factor to
be used
Picking plots
not same
every time
OK, if in the
same ﬁeld
and randomly
Form 2 &
Actual Yield
different
Yield at
higher unit
or adjacent
IU (18.4.6)
Yield with all agency
signatures will be ﬁnal
19.2 Wherever the yield estimates reported at IU level are abnormally low or high
vis-à-vis the general crop condition the IC in consultation with State Government
can make use of various products (e.g. Satellite based Vegetation Index, Weather
parameters, etc.) or other technologies (including statistical test, crop models etc.)
to conﬁrm yield estimates. If Insurance Company witnesses any
anomaly/deﬁciency in the actual yield data (partial /consolidated) received from the
State Government, the same shall be brought into the notice of concerned State
department within 7 days from date of receipt of yield data with speciﬁc
observations/remarks providing intimation to the GoI and anomaly, if any, may be
resolved in the next 7 days by the Head of the Nodal Department for State
Government. If the dispute is not resolved the matter, may be referred to the State
Level Technical Advisory Committee (STAC) for dispute resolution (Constitution of
STAC is deﬁned in Para 19.5). In case the matter stands unresolved even after
examination by STAC, it may be escalated to the Technical Advisory Committee
(TAC) (central level committee) along with all relevant documents including
minutes of the meetings/records of discussion and report of the STAC and
Departmental Head. Reference to TAC can be made thereafter only in conditions
speciﬁed in Para 19.7.1. However, data with anomalies which is not reported within
7 days will be treated as accepted to the IC. The protocol of the timelines deﬁned
above shall also be applicable to the actual Yield data being provided by the
concerned State department in batches, i.e. Crop-wise-District-wise lots of data
and timelines for each batch of data shall be counted separately/batch wise.
Unnecessary delay in the ﬁnalization of yield data will attract penal interest on due
claim amount payable to the farmers as decided by the concerned Departmental
Head in the matter.
19.3 The existing TAC comprising of representatives from the (DES), DAC&FW,
MNCFC, NSSO, IASRI, will be further augmented and constituted under the
chairmanship of Additional Secretary, DAC&FW and additional members on
case to case basis may be drawn from various organizations namely, relevant
institution under Indian Council of Agriculture Research (ICAR), Indian Agriculture
Research Institute (IARI), National Remote Sensing Centre (NRSC), Space
www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY 46
Chart: Procedures to be followed in different yield dispute cases

Applications Centre (SAC), Central Statistical Organization(CSO), Insurance
Regulatory and Development Authority of India (IRDAI), Reserve Bank of India
(RBI), National Bank for Agriculture & Rural Development (NABARD), India
Meteorological Department (IMD) or any other such organisation.
19.4 The TAC shall review all technical matters related to the execution of the Scheme.
In case, the matter requires further focused deliberations, the TAC will refer the
issue to the Technical Agency (TA) (refer Para 19.7.2). The TA will compulsorily
take the inputs/reports/relevant information from the concerned State Department
and IC and may also opt for representatives of other organizations/experts (if
required) with the permission of chairman of TAC and follow the procedure as
deﬁned in the SOP.
19.5 State shall also constitute the State Level Technical Advisory Committee (STAC)
on a similar pattern to resolve disputes. The STAC may be chaired by the Principal
Secretary/Secretary of the concerned Department with members from State
Agricultural University, State Remote Sensing Centre, IMD (state centre), DES,
any ICAR centre in the state, NSSO, etc. However, in case of disagreement
between the concerned parties, the case may be referred to the TAC along with
recommendations and ﬁndings for further deliberation/examination and decision.
19.6 TAC/TA/STAC shall deliberate and examine the subject matter and indicate their
views /decisions based on statistical/technological inputs and other related
scientiﬁc and technical parameters as detailed in the SOP.
19.7 The SOP to deal with yield dispute cases is as under:
19.7.1 When to use this SOP: This SOP will be followed only when there is a dispute
about the crop yield values between the State Government and IC and in the case
when it remains unresolved at the Head of the Nodal Department level and STAC
(Para 19.2) and has been referred to the Central Government Technical Advisory
Committee (TAC), which in turn decides that the matter needs to be referred to a
Technical Agency (TA). The dispute can be brought to the TAC, only in the case,
where all of the following conditions are satisﬁed. All cases not falling in these
criteria shall be decided by the head of Nodal Department with the approval of
competent authority and their decision shall be ﬁnal and binding on all concerned.
• There is more than 25% difference between the yield estimated by the State
Government and the IC.
• There is sufﬁcient documentary evidence that the CCEs have not been
conducted in the required numbers and as per the standard protocol, in at
least 20% area of the IUs for the particular crop in the Cluster.
• The matter has been considered by STAC but could not be resolved at the
State level.
• The IC has already carried out the technical analysis of the data in
consultation of the State Government or in collaboration with
Central/State/Empanelled agencies and has used satellite/model/weather
data to support its claim.
19.7.2 The Organizations to which TAC can refer the case: The organizations can be
the Central Government or autonomous organizations, which have requisite
capacity to carry out such analyses, such as: MNCFC (DAC&FW), SAC Indian
Space Research Organization (ISRO), NRSC (ISRO) and other similar
government organisations (e.g. IASRI, IMD, IARI etc.), as decided by TAC.
Hereafter, these organizations will be referred to as Technical Agencies (TA).
www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY 47

19.7.3 Data to be provided by State Government:
• All CCEs data of the contested area, in digital format, (preferably Excel),
along with photographs and other collateral data, as collected during CCE.
The CCE data should ideally be geo referenced.
• Village level crop area estimates.
• Long term (at least 10 years) data of crop yield at GP level (if not available, at
least at Taluka/block level) in digital format, (preferably Excel).
• Long term (at least 10 years) data of weather parameters (daily or weekly) at
GP level (if not available, at least at Taluka /block level). The weather
parameters should cover at least, rainfall, rainy days and temperature, in
digital format, (preferably Excel).
• Any information about pest/disease attack, hailstorm, cyclones, inundations,
heavy rainfall or any other natural/ manmade disasters in that area.
• Report of any analysis carried out by the States to support its claim.
19.7.4 Data to be provided by Insurance Company:
• Data of the co-observed CCEs collected by ICs in digital format, (preferably
Excel), along with photographs and other collateral data, as collected during
CCE.
• Data of weather observatories*, if maintained or sourced by ICs, in the
contested area.
• Report of the technical studies* carried out by the Insurance Company to
support its claim.
• Detailed reasons for the yield data being perceived as contested.
• Any UAV data/output collected from the contested area.
(*This data shall only be considered where government approved agency /
empanelled agency has been used Para 2.16).
19.7.5 Analysis to be carried out by the Technical Agency:
Among the steps given below, any 3 steps should be followed from (a) to (d) and
any one step should be followed from (e) to (f). The steps in (g) and (h)
are compulsory.
a) Statistical analysis of the CCE yield data: Basic Statistical Parameters
(Mean,Variance, Coefﬁcient of Variation (CV), Range, Standard Error, etc.)
Scatter plots, Test of Normality (Shapiro-Wilk test, Quartile- Quartile plot,
Whiskers box plot, Skewness and Kurtosis, etc.). It also needs to be checked
whether CCEs were done using the proper sampling design. Village level
crop area may also be checked to identify reasons for lower number of CCE.
b) Analysis of Weather Data: Weekly Rainfall Deviations (at least at block
level) or at grid level using gridded or satellite based data, Dry-spell
Occurrence, Temperature Anomaly, Soil Moisture Analysis (either from
satellite or model data) and any other available weather parameters (related
to crop condition), either from ground or satellite data. Another rainfall based
index, which can also be studied, is Standardized Precipitation Index (SPI).
www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY 48

SPI can be developed using IMD gridded rainfall data or National Oceanic
and Atmospheric Administration Climate Prediction Centre (NOAA CPC)
rainfall data. However, while using gridded data (either from satellite or
ground stations), appropriate resolution should be used at appropriate level.
For example, 0.25 degree data should be used only at the district level and not
at the block/village level. High resolution weather data can also be sourced
from weather companies.
c) Analysis of Long-term Yield Data: Previous 10 years' yield data (at GP or
Taluka level) analysis should be carried out to assess the ups and downs. The
analysis should include yield ranges, mean yield, standard deviation, and CV.
d) Analysis of Other collateral data: Other data or reports, which should be
considered, include Crop Weather Watch Report (DES, DAC&FW),NSSO
Supervised CCE data, Forecasting Agriculture Output using Space
Agrometerology and Land Based Observations(FASAL) programme crop
reports, drought assessment reports prepared by MNCFC, Market arrivals
and prices data for 2-3 years (http://agmarknet.gov.in/), crop condition data
available on VEDAS platform (https://vedas.sac.gov.in/vedas/), Disaster
maps available on Bhuvan platform, IMD weather bulletins, weather
information / forecasts available on MOSDAC (https://www.mosdac.gov.in/),
etc.
e) Analysis of Vegetation Index from Satellite Data: The vegetation index,
which can be used for this purpose are Normalized Difference Vegetation
Index (NDVI), Normalized Difference Wetness Index (NDWI), Vegetation
Condition Index (VCI), Temperature Condition Index (TCI), Vegetation Health
Index (VHI), Enhance Vegetation Index (EVI), etc. To derive these indices,
satellite data of appropriate resolution should be used (Table 6).
Table 6: Types of resolution to be used for vegetation index derivation for
different levels of analysis
However, wherever long-term satellite data is needed, Moderate Resolution
Imaging Spectroradiometer (MODIS) (250 m/500m) data can be used, but it should
not be used for village level information. Ideally for deriving crop speciﬁc vegetation
indices, crop maps should be overlaid on the data. Generally, for few major crops,
crop maps are prepared under FASAL project of DAC&FW. Crop maps can be
generated using either optical or microwave remote sensing Synthetic Aperture
Data(SAR) data of appropriate resolution. Wherever, crop maps are not available,
agricultural area map should be used. Agricultural area map can be
obtained from the Land Use (LU)/Land Cover (LC*) available with NRSC or
SRSCs. For assessing NDVI or NDWI deviation percentage, data of latest 2-3
years should be used or at least data of a normal crop year should be used.
Level of
Analysis
Spatial
Resolution
to be used Examples of Satellite/Sensor

Village level 5-30 m or
better
Resourcesat 2/2A: Linear Imaging Self Scanning Sensor
(LISS) IV (5.8m)/LISS III (23.5m), Sentinel 2:MSI (10 m);
Rapid Eye (6.5 m); SPOT 5 HRG (5,10 m), LandSat 8 OLI (30m).
Block/Tehsil
level

Resourcesat 2/2A: LISS III (23.5 m), Landsat 8: OLI (30
m); Sentinel 2:MSI (10 m); Resourcesat 2/2A: AWIFS (56m).
District level Resourcesat 2/2A: AWiFS (56 m); Proba V (100 m),
MODIS (250m/500m) or any other satellite.

10-60 m
50-500 m
www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY 49

www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY
f) Crop Growth Modelling: Yield loss estimates can be made using crop
simulation models such as Decision Support System for Agro-Technology
Transfer (DSSAT)/ Info Crop, etc. Remote sensing based semi-physical
modelling (e.g. Photosynthesis Efﬁciency Model) approach can also be used
for crop growth analysis. However, care should be taken to use well
calibrated and validated models and also models should be run in at higher
spatial resolution, at least 5 km. Crop Simulation models should be
assimilated with remote sensing products (e.g. crop map, phenology, Leaf
Area Index (LAI), etc.)
g) Identiﬁcation of Outliers: All these above analyses can be used to check
whether there was any reason for yield deviation as presented in the CCE
data. Then a yield proxy map may be prepared. The Yield proxy map can be
derived from remote sensing vegetation indices (single or combination of
indices), crop simulation model output, Remote sensing based semi-physical
models or an integration of various parameters which are related to crop yield,
such as soil, weather (gridded), satellite based products, etc. Whatever, yield
proxies to be used, it is the responsibility of the TA to record documentary
evidence (from their or other's published work) that the yield proxy is related to
the particular crop's yield. Then the IU level yields need to be overlaid on the
yield proxy map. Both yield proxy and CCE yield can be divided into 4-5
categories (e.g. Very good, Good, Medium, Poor, Very poor). Wherever there
is large mismatch between yield proxy and the CCE yield (more than 2 levels),
the CCE yield for that IU can be considered, as outliers.
h) Computing Yield for the Outliers: For the IUs, where the yield was
considered as outlier, the yield may be estimated by developing empirical
models (statistically signiﬁcant, with low Root Mean Square Error (RMSE)
between long-term yield data (at IU level or, if not available, higher
administrative level) and weather and remote sensing based index data. If
good quality long-term data is not available or if the model is not signiﬁcant,
when using time series data for an administrative unit(AU)
(GP/Mandal/Hobli/Block/Taluk etc.), the model can also be developed using
the previous 1-2 years' data across the IUs/administrative unit, within a
district. Using these models, yield for the concerned year should be
estimated. The estimates of only statistically signiﬁcant models (p-value
< 0.1) will be considered. RMSE (%) of the Yield estimated from the model
estimates, in comparison with the actual historical yield should preferably be
less than 30%. The ﬁnal yield estimate will be a combination of CCE
(whatever experiments available) estimates and technology estimates. The
estimates will be combined by giving weightage to the inverse of the errors of
the estimates. If the model was not statistically signiﬁcant, the average of
estimated yields of adjacent blocks should be used (Note: Each and every
case may have speciﬁc and special cause related to a problem and may not
be considered as a reference for any other case.) Each time, the stage of the
crop should be given prior importance e.g. 10 mm rainfall at vegetative stage
and at harvest or post-harvest stage has different impacts; a small amount
rainfall having devastating wind-speed have different impact than high
amount of rainfall having calm or no-wind. The TA needs to take into account
all these factors to consider each of the cases as an individual and special
case.
19.7.6 Time required for the analysis: The analysis needs to be completed by the
concerned TA, within one month of receipt of all mentioned data from the IC and the
State Government.
19.7.7 Funds needed for the analysis: All the analysis will be carried out by the TA, with
its existing resources. However, if there is any need of procurement of priced data
50

www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY
or services, this may be funded by the concerned IC or the State Government,
whichever organization has brought the dispute issue up to TAC.
19.7.8 Support to Technical Agency: The TA, if required, can take the support from the
experts of SRSCs and SAUs. For this the State Agriculture Department will issue
required instructions to concerned experts/agencies. A concerned ofﬁcer of the
PMFBY TSU will coordinate between the TA and the state.
19.7.9 General Suggestions: Though this SOP identiﬁes the procedure for yield dispute
resolutions, in the long run, it will beneﬁt the scheme and the farmers, if there is no
dispute. The following suggestions are made to avoid dispute:
• The States should conduct the CCEs following the standard procedure
(proper sampling plan) and collect the data using CCE-Agri App only.
• States need to pro-actively use technology for more accurate crop yield
estimation.
• States should develop mechanism to resolve disputes at the State level by
using the technical support from State level organizations, such as
Agricultural Universities, SRSCs, and ICAR Centres located in the State,
local IMD ofﬁce, etc.
• The ICs should proactively, get involved with the States for supervision of
CCEs.
• The ICs should increasingly invest in the use of technology to support the loss
assessment.
• There should be better coordination between the State and the ICs.
20 Use of Innovative Technologies in Yield Estimation:
20.1 Rationalization of CCEs (Smart Sampling Technique (SST) and CCE
Optimization):
It is observed that crop yield estimation problem in the insurance units is increasing
and thereby reducing the efﬁciency of the crop insurance mechanism. Disputes on
the quality of yield data is a challenge in the effective implementation of the
Scheme. Technology interventions are highly recommended from time to time to
bring improvements in the crop yield assessment. Under the revamped PMFBY,
implementation of smart sampling techniques is mandatory for (a) improving the
CCE ﬁeld's selection and (b) optimizing the number of CCEs. Through smart
sampling, the CCE ﬁelds in each insurance unit can be selected based on the yield
proxy index, thus accounting for the spatial variability in crop yield. The primary and
the unique advantage of this new technique is achieving improved distribution of
CCEs in the notiﬁed insurance units thereby leading to more representative yield
estimates compared to conventional random sampling approach. Crop condition
and crop risks occurrence, if any, during major part of the season are taken into
account while developing a-priori yield proxy. The add-on beneﬁts of smart
sampling include; (a) notiﬁcation of CCE locations only a few days before harvest,
thus minimizing moral hazard issues and (b) identiﬁcation of CCE locations
51

through digital map base, thus minimizing human bias/preferences in locating the
ﬁelds. Digital database of CCE facilitates linking of CCE data with satellite data and
different thematic datasets. The two important input data layers for implementing
smart sampling are crop map and crop yield proxy map in digital form in moderate
to high spatial resolution.
20.1.1 Crop map: Satellite derived accurate crop map is a pre-requisite for smart
sampling. Crop mapping accuracy depends on many aspects, which include (a)
spatial resolution of satellite data vis-à-vis the ﬁeld size, (b) the spectral bands
being used for classiﬁcation, (c) the classiﬁcation algorithm (d) the cropping pattern
(mono cropping or mixed cropping) and (e) granularity and quality of the ground
truth data used in analysis of the satellite data. Both commission error (e.g.
non-paddy areas represented as paddy) and omission error (e.g. paddy ﬁelds are
represented as non-paddy) would affect the efﬁciency of smart sampling. Satellite
data of 10-30 m spatial resolution and crop mapping accuracy more than 80% are
recommended for generating crop map for Smart Sampling.
20.1.2 Crop yield proxy map: Ability of the yield proxy to capture the spatial variability of
yield within the IU largely determines the efﬁciency of Smart sampling technique.
Government of India has developed a protocol for yield proxy generation (Protocol
of Smart Sampling for Crop Cutting Experiments, September 2019). The details of
yield proxy generation using multiple satellite, weather and ground data are
provided in the protocol. The yield proxy deﬁned in the protocol is available in
10-30 m resolution, which has higher accuracy for yield estimation, as shown in
various pilot studies. States may adopt that method for yield proxy generation. The
yield proxy layer has to be generated in time, preferably 30 days and not later than
20 days before harvest time.
20.1.3 Selection of CCE ﬁelds: The Crop map should be co-registered with the Yield
proxy map and overlaid on it. Density slicing based on 4-6 quantiles (divide the
frequency distribution in equal proportion) should be carried out for the yield proxy
of each district/block (6 classes are taken if stratiﬁcation is done at district level and
4 classes are made if stratiﬁcation is done at Block/Tehsil level). IU Boundaries are
overlaid and for each IU 2-3 major classes are considered. 4 locations (primary) are
randomly selected from these classes, proportionate to number of pixels under
each class. For each point, 2 additional points (secondary and tertiary) are selected
from the same class, as reserve. For each point, the latitude/longitude, class
category, GP name, Taluka and district names are to be provided to the SRSCs.
Field survey numbers corresponding to each location are to be identiﬁed by
SRSC using cadastral maps and provided to the ﬁeld functionaries at least 5-days
before harvesting. Wherever cadastral map is not available, geographical
locations (Latitude and Longitude) of the ﬁeld is to be given to the ﬁeld
functionaries, who can locate using any navigation App.
20.1.4 Crops to be covered: Smart Sampling Technique (SST) for CCE ﬁelds selection
may be implemented for many crops like paddy, wheat, jowar (Rabi), mustard etc.,
wherever satellite-based crop mapping and multi-index based yield proxy layer
generation are available (under the FASAL project of DAC&FW). Generally, it is
recommended for main crops like paddy, wheat, jowar, mustard, cotton etc., since
the procedures for generating the above inputs are fairly operational. For other
crops, methodologies are to be standardized and the States are advised to
www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY 52

undertake such Research & Development (R&D) studies for standardization of
approaches so that a greater number of crops can be brought under the purview of
smart sampling.
20.1.5 Variable Methodology: Selection of right data and right techniques of analysis for
crop mapping and crop yield proxy generation determines the efﬁciency of smart
sampling. One methodology with one set of inputs for all regions and crops may not
work. Diverse crop growing environments may need using different methods for
different regions. One has to check for the robustness of the methodology by
applying certain quality parameters such as sensitivity of crop yield proxy and
accuracy of crop layer using ground truth or secondary data.
20.1.6 Smart sampling for CCE Reduction (CCE Optimization): The CCE
Optimization studies carried out by the Department have shown possibility of
reduction of 30-75% of CCE numbers by adoption of technology. Accordingly, CCE
optimization can be followed for similar crops as in Smart Sampling (e.g. Paddy,
Wheat, Rabi Sorghum, Mustard and Cotton). For CCE optimization, similar crop
map and yield proxy as deﬁned in (Para 20.1.1) can be used. Similar stratiﬁcation
procedure also may be followed. However, in this case number of selected CCE in
GP ranges between 2-4 depending on number of major clusters in the GP. The GP
level yield is not simple average of CCE yield, but area weighted average of the
CCEs. While computing area weighted average, the CCE data of other points in
same block are considered. Suppose a block has 4 classes of yield index. Out of
these 3 classes are major for one GP. So, the GP can have 3 CCE points. The
example in the following table shows how GP yield will be computed.
Example of GP level yield computation using optimized CCE data
20.2 Two-Step Yield Estimation:
One of the major requirements of the Scheme, is carrying out a large number of
CCEs (at least 4 per GP, for a major crop), for yield estimation, which is the basis for
claim computation. However, conducting such larger number of Crop Cutting
Experiments (CCEs) has become a very cumbersome task, considering the short
harvest period within which all CCEs have to be completed. This may also result
compromising the quality, rigor and accuracy of the CCEs. In order to overcome
this, the GoI is trying to implement various approaches with the help of technology,
such as, i) smart sampling under which CCE sites are being selected based on
satellite remote sensing-based proxy yield parameters. Another signiﬁcant
approach which the Government is proposing is to adopt the Two-step yield
www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY
Yield Class in
the GP
Proportion of
Area with that
Yield class in
GP

Number of
CCEs for that
yield class in
GP

Average Yield for the yield
class in the Block
A1 30%

1

Y1
A2 40%

1

Y2
A3 20%

1

Y3
A4 10%

NIL

Y4
Total 100% 3 GP Yield = Y1x0.3+ Y2x0.4+
Y3x0.2+ Y4x0.1
53

estimation. The basic idea behind the Two-step yield estimation is to
assess/categorize the crop loss incurred due to adverse climatic conditions, pest
infestation etc. based on technical parameters (remote sensing, weather, ﬁeld
survey etc.) and carrying out required number (as deﬁned in PMFBY) of CCEs
wherever the situation is 'severe' or 'moderate'. Wherever the situation is 'mild' or
'normal' based on the technical parameters, reduced number of CCEs (as deﬁned
for a higher administrative unit) are to be conducted. In other words, the required
number (4 per GP) of CCEs will be carried out only in the places where there is a
situation of crop loss (severe or moderate) and limited number of CCEs will be
carried out where the situations are 'mild' or 'normal'. A typical example of similar
approach is followed in drought assessment where weather, satellite and ground
parameters are used to assess the drought situation and then ground truth for loss
assessment is carried out wherever the situation is 'Moderate' or 'Severe'. All
States are following this procedure for drought declaration. In order to implement a
similar approach in the Two-step yield estimation, there is a need to identify the
technology parameters separately for different climate induced disasters, pest
infestation etc. which have been notiﬁed in the PMFBY. Also, there is a need to
generate threshold values of different parameters to categorize a situation into
'Severe', 'Moderate', 'Mild' or 'Normal'. Thus, in a normal crop season, CCEs will be
conducted at aggregated level, say block/taluka, assuming that the CCE derived
average yield at block/taluka level represents the average yields of the insurance
units within it. If the seasonal conditions are not normal, i.e. crops have been
exposed to natural calamities like ﬂood, drought, abnormal weather events,
pests/diseases etc., then CCEs will be conducted as per the existing procedures
and deﬁned numbers, in each of the affected insurance unit. In case, a block/taluka
is identiﬁed having some part in Moderate/Severe situation, while rest part in
Normal situation, all the IUs under Moderate/Severe will have required number of
CCEs at IU level, while for rest part will have 16 CCEs, at block/taluka level, whose
average yield will be used for all the Normal IUs. The Two-step yield estimation
approach will be followed, only when the Insurance Unit is below Block/Taluk level,
i.e. Village/GP or Mandal/Firka/Revenue Circle/Hobli or any other equivalent unit.
The most important elements in the Two-step yield estimation procedure are:
• Identiﬁcation of insurance units affected by crop risks during the season.
• Time of occurrence of crop risks impacting the timely identiﬁcation of affected
IUs.
20.2.1 Identiﬁcation of the Insurance Units (IUs) affected by crop risks: Using
multiple indicators such as rainfall, dry spells, temperature, satellite-based crop
condition, satellite derived thematic maps, ﬁeld data and secondary data, etc.,
decision rules will be developed and summarized in to a look-up table called
"Deviation Matrix (DM)". Based on the Deviation Matrix, the Insurance Units (IUs)
can be classiﬁed into Severe', 'Moderate', 'Mild' or 'Normal', with respect to any
particular risk. Indicators and Deviation Matrix are speciﬁc to risks and regions.
20.2.2 Crop risks covered under Two-Step yield estimation:
The following crop risks are notiﬁed for implementing the Two-step yield estimation.
• Drought
• Prolonged Dry Spell
www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY 54

www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY
• Floods
• Cyclones
• Pest/diseases
• Hailstorm (if it is for large area)
• Unseasonal rains
• Frost
Data required for generating indicators, decision rules and Deviation Matrices for
the above risks will include, but not limited to,
• Weather data - rainfall (amount, intensity & distribution), dry spell, humidity,
temperature (Maximum, Minimum and Average), wind speed, cloud cover,
etc. at daily/weekly interval for the current period and normal values
• Soil Moisture
• Area Sown
• Satellite derived crop map, ﬂooded area map, crop condition indices
• Satellite Derived Agro meteorological parameters
• Pest and Disease infestation related ﬁeld measurements

• Hydrological Parameters (Ground water, Reservoir Storage, etc.)
• Soil and Topography
• Mobile App based ﬁeld data
The Indicators/ Decision Rule/Deviation Matrix will be risk speciﬁc.
Granularity of input data plays an important role because the analysis has to be
carried out at Insurance Unit scale. In case of weather data, it is desirable to use
standardized Automatic Weather Station (AWS)/Automatic Rain Gauge (ARG)
data. Satellite data of moderate spatial resolution 10-50 m is suggested.
Crop risks covered under Two-step yield estimation:

S. N. Risks / Perils Indicator Parameters
• Rainfall amount
• Dry spell
• Soil moisture
• Satellite indices
• Crop area sown
• Hydrological Parameters (Ground water levels,
Reservoir storage level)
ii.
Drought*
Prolonged Dry spell*
55

www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY

• Amount of rainfall
• Topography
• Soil type
• Crop Type & Stage
• Satellite Data
iii. Flood
• Rainfall Amount & Intensity
• Wind speed
• Landfall area
• Satellite Data
• Crop stage
iv. Cyclone
• Dual-pol Radar Measurements
• Ground Information
• Satellite Data
v. Widespread
Hailstorm
• Rainfall Amount
• Rainfall Intensity & Duration
• Satellite derived Rainfall
• Crop Stage
vi. Unseasonal
rain
• Weather data - cloud cover, humidity and temperature
• Ground Information
• Satellite based crop condition before and post event
• Biomass
• Soil Moisture
• Crop Type & Stage
Pest / Diseasevii.
viii. Frost
• Minimum Temperature
• Clear Sky
• Wind
20.2.3 Crop risks not covered under Two-step yield estimation:
Two step yield estimation will only be applicable to settle the claims based on end
season yield data on an area-based approach. The following risks are not covered
under the Two-step yield estimation because of technical reasons:
• Localized Hailstorms.
• Land slides.
• Loss due to attack by Wild animals.
These risks are generally localized in occurrence and indicators are not readily
available to capture the impact. Mobile app-based ﬁeld data provides better
evidence on such risks and Insurance Units may be categorized using such data.

20.2.4 Time of occurrence of crop risks: Timely identiﬁcation of risk-affected insurance
units is very critical to ensure the preparedness by the ﬁeld functionaries for timely
execution of CCEs. It is recommended that the affected insurance units be
identiﬁed by at least 20-30 days before crop harvesting. That means, crop risks
S. N. Risks / Perils Indicator Parameters
56
*Note: The Government, in 2016, brought out the drought manual. The same approach, as deﬁned in the
drought manual, should be used to categorized severe, moderate, mild and normal situation for drought.

occurring from sowing till 30 days before harvest are only accounted. Abnormal
events like cyclones/ﬂoods or unseasonal rains that occur a few days/weeks
before harvest are to be included in the CCE plan. Identiﬁcation and notiﬁcation of
insurance units in such a small time window would be a challenge. Hence, there
should be some back-up plan with all the States to deal with calamities/risks that
occur just before crop harvest. Considering the nature and time of occurrence of
crop risks, a quick decision has to be taken by the States on CCE plan, whether to
go for requisite number of planned CCEs at IU level or group of homogenous IUs
/pooled areas for conducting less number of CCEs.
20.2.5 Crops to be covered: The two-step yield estimation procedure may be
implemented for all major crops by deﬁning the set of input indicators for assessing
the effect of crop risks.
20.2.6 Exceptions:
• Widespread post-harvest losses will be out of the ambit of the Two-step yield
estimation.
• Localized calamities, as described in these OGs will be assessed at farm level
by the same procedure as described in the guidelines.
20.2.7 Key Considerations:
• GoI has formed Technical sub committees to prepare the detailed protocol for
indicators and threshold to be used for each risk/peril. The same protocol,
once available should be used by the States. The protocol may be reviewed
periodically with the advancement of technologies.
• Considering that conducting study at Gram Panchayat (GP) level is a time
consuming process, this activity should be completed well ahead of the CCE
Season.
st
• Within the 1 step of the process, the fact that more than one crop may grow
in an IU, with varied growth cycle and thus different response to various perils,
should be taken into account.
• Sufﬁcient awareness should be generated amongst farmers and other
stakeholder about the change in the process of estimating crop yield and
crop loss.
20.3 Area Discrepancy in Insurance Coverage:
It is noticed that in some instances in States/districts, area insured is much more
than area sown ﬁgures hence, compulsory use of Remote Sensing Technology
(RST)/ satellite imagery, digitization of land records needs to be done to minimize
the area discrepancy. For this, detailed procedure has been laid down in
Section 25 of this document.
20.4 Direct Yield Estimation through Technology:
20.4.1 For addressing the issue of reliability of CCEs in terms of their accuracy,
representativeness and timeliness, innovative technologies such as satellite
remote sensing, drone, modeling, AWS/ARG, Artiﬁcial Intelligence & Machine
Learning (AI&ML) real time transmission of data etc. should be utilized. This will
ensure accurate assessment of yield and timely payment of claims to farmers.
Various studies carried out by national and international organizations, including
MNCFC, NRSC, SAC, Research Program on Climate Change, Agriculture and
Food Security (CCAFS), International Rice Research Institute (IRRI), International
www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY 57

www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY
Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI), World Bank, etc. have shown that the use
of satellite, weather, soil and crop data, along with images/video capture of crop
growth at various stages and accurate sample CCE data collection can improve the
yield data quality/ timeliness and support timely claim processing and payments.
20.4.2 States, with the support of national centres as mentioned in Para 20.4.1 as well
above, SRSCs and SAUs, need to carry out adequate number of pilot studies for
improved yield estimation using technology, as mentioned above, and small
number of good quality CCEs. When a signiﬁcant correlation is observed
between technology estimated yield and yield estimated through
CCEs, States and IC scan use these technologies in estimating the crop yields at
IU level, subject to the satisfaction of both States and ICs about the accuracy of the
yield estimates, to service the claims.
20.5 Concerns in Yield Data Quality and Timelines for Data Reporting:
20.5.1 It has been observed that the normal CCE process being followed by the
States/UTs for estimating yield is lacking in reliability, accuracy and speed, which
affects claim settlement. There is a need for real time, good quality and reliable
actual yield-data for which mandatory use of smart phones / handheld devices has
to be done for capturing images, location of the CCE and for online transmission of
data on NCIP through CCEs Agri-app. RST using satellite and drones, weather
data, model etc. may also be used for the purpose of increasing accuracy and
speed of yield estimation through CCEs.
20.5.2 The cost of using technology etc. for conduct of CCE process specially purchase of
smart phones/handheld devices and use of technology (RST, Drone etc.) will be
shared between Central Government and States / UTs on 50:50 basis, wherever
necessary, subject to a cap on total funds to be made available by Central
Government for this purpose based on approximate cost of procuring handheld
devices/smart phones and other related costs (RST, Drone, etc.)
20.5.3 If the CCE derived yield data is not provided by the States within the stipulated time
lines then technology derived Synthetic Yield data (i.e. crop yield
estimated/simulated using satellite derived indices, crop growth simulation model,
weather data, etc.) will be used for claims settlements. Such Synthetic Yield data
of a crop will be compared with corresponding historical yield data (derived from
CCE) for indemnity assessment. Synthetic yield data is meant for the purpose of
timely settlement of claims when CCE-derived yield data availability is delayed.
Synthetic yield or technology derived yield is generated by the agencies
designated by the Ministry. The GoI will convene the meeting of the TAC constituted
for this purpose with the concerned State Government and the IC to ﬁnalize the
technology-based claim calculation for that crop. If the TAC recommends, the GoI
will send a request letter to MNCFC (Mahalanobis National Crop Forecast Centre)/
Other Designated Agency (e.g. SAC, NRSC, IASRI, IMD, etc.) for the calculation
of synthetic yield (model-based yield) for that crop. After the meeting of Expert
Committee and the MNCFC/ Other Designated Agency will share the synthetic
yield within one month from the ﬁnal receipt of required input data from the State
and/or IC and the claims will be settled based on synthetic yield provided by
MNCFC / Other Designated Agency. Meanwhile, the Insurance Company should
send a reminder to the State for sharing the crop wise AY data with them on NCIP
ICs within one month from the completion of CCEs for that season. Also, the IC
should send the second reminder to the State for sharing the AY data with them
within 15 days before the cut-off date for initiation of technology-based claim
calculation given by the GoI to the State. If, the IC fails to send one or both the
reminders to the State for sharing the Actual Yield (AY) data, then the GoI will
impose penalty on the IC. Similarly, the State Government must share all the Actual
Yield (AY) data with IC within the stipulated cut-off date as per the PMFBY
58

guidelines or within the extended cut-off date given by the GoI to the State. In case,
State Government fails to share the AY data with ICs on or before extended cut-off
date, then the IC will send an intimation letter to the GoI. Thereafter, the GoI will
convene the meeting of the TAC constituted for this purpose with the concerned
State Government and IC to ﬁnalize the technology-based claim calculation for
that crop.
20.5.3.1 Synthetic Yield Data: In the event, the CCE derived yield data is not provided by
the States within the stipulated time-line, Technology derived synthetic yield data
will be used for claims settlements. Synthetic yield is computed based on empirical
or semi-empirical models. Synthetic yield data will be provided by the
MNCFC/Other Designated Agency. Calculation of synthetic yield data involves
analysis of satellite data, meteorological data and other data and therefore there
will be ﬁnancial and logistic requirements. The State Government shall bear all the
cost of the synthetic yield estimation.
20.6 Technology Fund: A technology fund will be created by the GoI wherein
resources shall be allocated for meeting 50% of GoI share/100% grant in various
technological interventions undertaken by the State Government funds as
admissible. The fund shall be augmented with excess farmers share of premium
surrendered by ICs due to application of Area Correction Factor (ACF) and
penalties imposed on ICs on account of poor performance by ICs as per the
parameters outlined in Annexure-IV.
20.7 Support to the States and ICs for technology adoption: Revamped PMFBY
relies more on technology-based solutions for enhancing efﬁciency and objectivity
in its implementation. For ﬁnalizing the best possible methodologies corresponding
to the provisions of OGs, States and ICs need the support of Technology
Institutions. This involves a lot of preparatory work by the States/IC for
implementing the revamped scheme. In this connection, States are advised to take
the support of MNCFC, SRSCs, National Institutes like SAC (ISRO), NRSC
(ISRO), IMD and ICAR to undertake the analysis. Crop maps and satellite indices
that are being generated at MNCFC under various projects like FASAL, National
Agriculture Drought Assessment and Monitoring System (NADAMS), Coordinated
Horticulture Assessment and Management using Geo-iNformatics (CHAMAN) etc.
can be made available to States by MNCFC for the purpose of developing the
technology interventions. This would avoid duplication of work by States/ICs.
20.8 Training and capacity building: PMFBY rely largely on technology-based
products and services for efﬁciency, transparency and objectivity in its
implementation. All the stakeholders should therefore create necessary
infrastructure, data collection systems and manpower for technology adoption. In
this connection, States and ICs have to be given regular training for better
understanding of the new guidelines and developing the methods for
implementation. Therefore, Training and Capacity building programmes will be
developed by DAC&FW with the support of MNCFC, SAC, NRSC, and ICAR.
21 Assessment of Claims & Claim Settlement:
21.1 Payment of Claim Liabilities is the responsibility of concerned IC. The IC shall
therefore take all the necessary steps to take appropriate reinsurance cover for
their portfolio in order to safeguard insured's interest. In case premium to claims
ratio exceeds 1:3.5 or percentage of claims to Sum Insured exceeds 35%,
whichever is higher, at the National Level in a crop season, then Government will
provide protection to ICs. The losses exceeding the abovementioned level in the
crop season would be met from equal contribution by the Central Government and
the concerned State/UT Governments. The claim settlement protocol under basic
cover and all other add-on coverages are explained in details as below:
www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY 59

www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY
21.2 Yield loss due to wide-spread calamities under Basic Cover:
21.2.1 If AY per hectare of the insured crop for the Insurance Unit (calculated on basis of
requisite number of CCEs) in insured season, falls short of speciﬁed TY for the
season, all insured farmers growing that crop in that IU are deemed to have
suffered a shortfall of similar magnitude in yield. PMFBY seeks to provide coverage
against such contingency.
'Claim' shall be calculated at IU level as per the following formula:
Where Threshold Yield (TY) for a crop in a notiﬁed insurance unit is the average
yield of best 5 years from past seven years multiplied by applicable Indemnity Level
for that crop as notiﬁed by concerned State for the season.
Illustration
In table below, assumed yield of wheat for the last 7 years is given for insurance unit
area of "X". Calculation of TY for Rabi 2015-16 season is given in Table 7 below:
The years of 2012-13 and 2014-15 have the lowest yields.
Total of yields of seven years is 22350 kg/ha and that of two lowest yield years is
3550kg/ha i.e.(1800+1750). Therefore, according to the provision, average of best
ﬁve years excluding two lowest yield years will be (22350-3550=18800/5) i.e. 3760
kg/ha. Hence, threshold yield at 90%, 80% and 70% of indemnity levels will be
3384kg/ha, 3008kg/ha and 2632 kg/ha respectively.
21.2.2 District Level Joint Committee (DLJC) will be constituted which will look after the
invoking of On-Account Payment under mid-season adversity, prevented sowing,
localized calamities and post-harvest losses.
21.3 Prevented / Failed Sowing and Prevented Planting / Germination Claims:
21.3.1 Insurance cover will be provided to farmers in case of widespread incidence of
eligible risks (Para 5.2.1) affecting crops in more than 75% of the area sown in a
notiﬁed unit at early stage of sowing which is up to 30 days from the start of sowing
but no later than 15 days from cut-off date for enrolment, leading to the total loss of
crop or in a condition where farmers are not in a position to either sow or transplant
the crop.
21.3.2 Eligibility Criteria:
21.3.2.1 This add-on cover will only be available if this cover is notiﬁed by the State/UT.
21.3.2.2 Notiﬁed IUs will be eligible for "Prevented Sowing/ Planting" pay-out only if more
than 75% of Crop-wise, normal sown area for notiﬁed crop in the IU experienced
unsown/prevented sowing/germination failure during the sowing period due to
occurrence of widespread incidence of eligible risks. Normal sown area of the
crops will be the average of actual sown area of the preceding three seasons.
Threshold Yield - Acutal Yield
X Sum Insured
Threshold Yield
Year 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14 2014-15
Yield
(kg / ha) 4500 3750 2000 4250 1800 4300 1750
60

21.3.2.3 Only those farmers are eligible for ﬁnancial support under this cover who have paid
the premium i.e. the premium amount has been debited from their account before
the damage notiﬁcation was issued by the State Government for invoking this
provision for compensation. Banks must ensure that the farmers premium is
debited within 15 days from the sanction/renewal of KCC/crop loan of all eligible
loanee farmers and before the cut-off date for debiting the premium.
21.3.2.4 The provision could be invoked for a speciﬁc crop or a group of crops in notiﬁed IU,
by the Nodal Department of the State Government on the basis of the
recommendation submitted by DLMC supported by evidence/weather reports,
other proxy weather indicators and the joint loss assessment survey subject to the
fulﬁlment of the conditions speciﬁed in these guidelines.
21.3.2.5 The eligibility of claim settlement shall be decided based on the outcome of the joint
loss assessment surveys carried out by the representatives of IC, District
Administration/State Government Nodal Department and Farmers. In case of a
dispute/disagreement between the stakeholders regarding the quantum/extent of
loss reported by the Joint Loss Assessment committee, the crop loss
assessment/estimation for the eligibility of the claims will be done using technology
derived solutions such as weather/remote-sensing indices along with loss
assessment surveys of Joint Committee with the weightage of 70%: 30%
respectively for the ﬁnal assessment and evaluation of the extent of loss.
Acceptance of the technology driven extent of loss will be binding on
all stakeholders.
21.3.2.6 STAC in coordination with State Remote Sensing Application Centre will conduct
yield estimation and assessment of the loss as mentioned in Para 21.3.2.5 based
on the protocol developed by MNCFC. STAC may take the help of MNCFC if
they desire.
21.3.2.7 The amount payable would be 25% of the gross total Sum Insured and the
insurance coverage shall get terminated. Farmers can have the alternative to sow
shorter duration, resistant crops and avail crop insurance on such crops within the
enrolment period for the same.
21.3.3 Proxy-Indicators: Indicators to be used for loss intimation could be rainfall data,
other weather indices, satellite imagery, Remote sensing indices, drought
assessment reports of the MNCFC and crop condition reports by district level/
State Government ofﬁcials, supported by media reports and ﬁeld photographs. The
State's notiﬁcation should include all the necessary details and the broad list of
indicators to be used in this regard.
21.3.4 Loss assessment procedure:
21.3.4.1 The States/UTs would notify the Crop Calendar indicating crop-wise and
agro-climatic zone or district wise cut-off dates by which, this provision could be
invoked. However, these dates should not be later than 30 days from the time of
normal sowing period and no later than 15 days from the cut-off date for enrolment
of farmer. Beyond this date, this provision shall not be applicable under
any circumstance.
21.3.4.2 The DLMC will recommend invoking of prevented sowing to the State Nodal
Department. State Government Notiﬁcation will only be issued by the concerned
State Nodal Department after consideration and validation using the available
proxy data. ICs may also provide input to the State in this regard with substantial
evidence for consideration within the stipulated time so that claim of ICs may be
www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY 61

www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY
veriﬁed by them. If IC makes such a case then DLMC/State Government is bound
to get it examined within a stipulated time of 7 days and in case State Government
ﬁnds that Prevented Sowing is not applicable then they should inform the IC
accordingly along with providing cogent reasons for the same.
21.3.4.3 If it is felt that the prevailing conditions precedent triggers for invocation of
prevented sowing have been breached, the Chairman, DLMC on his/her own
accord or on the directions of the State Nodal Department, may convene a meeting
of the DLMC wherein the weather/proxy indicator data as indicated in Table 8 shall
be presented and discussed. If the Committee ﬁnds a breach of the conditions,
then DLMC will issue directions for conducting the joint survey of the crop-wise
affected insurance units which includes a written notice to concerned ICs for a Joint
Survey. The report of the joint survey will be presented in the DLMC and with the
recommendation of DLMC it shall be forwarded to the State Government for
validation and issuance of the necessary notiﬁcation for invocation of
prevented sowing.
21.3.4.4 State Government would declare the list of notiﬁed IU that suffered Prevented or
Failed Sowing/Planting/Germination conditions with approximate areas in
percentage of the unit. Such information should be compulsorily uploaded on NCIP
to arrive at the Claim amount of eligible insured farmers from the Portal itself.
21.3.5 Conditions:
21.3.5.1 The cover will be available for major crops covering a total sown area higher than
25% of the total sown area of the District/Taluka or the equivalent unit for the
season (refer Para 7.2.1.1). Provision of Area Correction Factor (ACF) will not be
applicable.
21.3.5.2 Mere disbursement/ sanction of loan without receipt/ debit of premium before the
notiﬁcation of calamity won't make a farmer eligible for claim.
21.3.5.3 This provision has to be notiﬁed by the State Government within 30 days from date
of the normal sowing and no later than 15 days of the cut-off date for enrolment,
beyond which the clause cannot be invoked.
21.3.5.4 The IC would disburse the claim within 30 days of the State's Notiﬁcation invoking
the event of the insured risk.
21.3.5.5 The pay-out under the cover would be disbursed by the IC only after the receipt of atst least advance Government share of premium subsidy (1 instalment of both State
& Central Government).
21.3.5.6 Insurance Cover would terminate for the affected crop in a Notiﬁed IU once a claim
under this section is invoked and the affected Insurance Unit/ Crop would not be
eligible for any other add-on and area yield based claim calculated at the end of the
season for that crop.
21.3.5.7 Once this provision is invoked, no fresh enrolment of farmers for the affected
notiﬁed crops and areas would be done.
21.3.5.8 Once exigency is invoked it applies to all the insured farmers in the Notiﬁed
Insurance Unit for a given crop, including those whose crop survived.
21.3.5.9 The Bank would remit farmers' premium to IC, with eligible loanee farmers list,
within 7 days of the intimation of loss under this section, if not uploaded earlier on
Portal. However, this option must be exercised as a last recourse with proper
justiﬁcation.
62

Illustration
21.3.5.10 District 'B' with 100 Insurance Units has been affected by a dry-spell at the
beginning of crop season, consequently about 80% of the area could not be sown
in about 50 Insurance Units for groundnut crop, where per hectare sum insured is
Rs. 20,000. As per the provision of payment for prevented sowing, the beneﬁt
payable is Sum Insured x 25%, which on a sum insured of Rs.20,000 works out to
Rs.5,000/- in the 50 Insurance Units with more than 75% area which could not
be sown.
21.3.5.11 Detailed Procedure and Timelines for payment of Prevented / Failed Sowing and
Prevented Planting / Germination Claims is mentioned in Table 8 below:
Sl. No. Action required to
be taken
Schedule for taking
action
1
Action to be
taken by
Formation of District Level
Joint Committee (DLJC)
under the Chairpersonship
of the District Collector
(DC)/ District Magistrate
(DM*) with the following
members for loss
assessment survey:
• District Agriculture /
Horticulture / Revenue
Ofﬁcer - as Convener.
• Concerned IC
• Representative of the
IMD from nearest
Observatory.
• Representative of Krishi
Vigyan Kendra (KVK) /
Agriculture University.
• 3 representatives from
district farmers nominated
by Agriculture Department.
State/ UT Nodal
Department/ (SLCCCI).
It should be a part of main
Notiﬁcation to be issued the
by State/ UT for
implementation of PMFBY.
The composition of
Committee should be
notiﬁed in the PMFBY
notiﬁcation by the State/UT
& ﬁrst meeting should be
held within a week after
the notiﬁcation to
familiarize the members
with the procedure to be
followed.
Details of Government
AWS/ARG (at appropriate
level according to
availability) in Notiﬁcation
to be issued by the State/
UT the for implementation
of PMFBY for weather data
supply including rainfall to
DLJC.
Major crops should be
declared strictly based on
the criteria deﬁned in the
OG and they should be
mentioned in the notiﬁcation
issued by State Government.
State/ UT Nodal
Department/ (SLCCCI).
To be included in the
main notiﬁcation of
State Government itself.
- do -
www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY 63

Sl. No. Action required to
be taken
Schedule for taking
action
Action to be
taken by
District-wise tentative time
period and cut off dates for
sowing of major crops.

*Cut-off date for
applicability of prevented
sowing provision shall not
be one month from the time
of normal sowing period
and no later than 15 days
from the enrolment cut-off
date.
- do -
www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY
2
Details of the month-wise
district-wise as per IMD's
Long Period Average
(LPA) of rainfall.
Decision to be taken about
fulﬁlment of the eligibility of
more than 75% affected
sown area in the
notiﬁed insurance unit
within one month of the
sowing period based on the
occurrence of any one of
the proxy Indicators
occurring along with other
proxy indicators:-
• Severe Drought
Condition, as deﬁned in
the Drought Manual,
2016.
• Dry spells and drought
declared by State/ UT.
• Abnormally Low / High
temperature in
comparison to LPA >20%
deviation
• Abnormally Low / High
rainfall in comparison to
LPA > 20% deviation.
• Widespread incidences
of Insect, Pest &
Diseases impacting >
75% crop sown Area*.
• Any other deﬁned natural
event including ﬂooding
which may lead to
widespread losses
impacting > 75% crop
sown area*.
Supported by Satellite
Image and Satellite Index
based outputs to be
provided by ISRO/SAC,
MNCFC or any other Govt.
approved agency, Govt.
crop condition reports,
and Media reports etc.
Deﬁnitions &
interpretations regarding
proxy indicators would be
applied as per IMD's
guidelines as below.
DL JC
64
Deﬁnitions &
interpretations regarding
proxy indicators for
drought would be applied
as per Drought Manual
2016, i.e.
1. Rainfall Index:
Dry Spell: 3-4 weeks with
<50% of Normal RF
Rainfall Deviation: < -20%
of Normal Rainfall (RF).
2. Remote Sensing:
NDVI/NDWI deviation:
< -20%-30%
VCI Value--0-40%.
3. Crop Sowing:
Area Under Sowing:
Kharif < 33.3%, Rabi
< 50% of crop-wise
normal Sown Area*.
4. Soil Moisture:
Plant available Soil Moisture
(PASM) / Moisture
Adequacy Index (MAI)--
0%-75%.
5. Hydrology:
Reservoir Storage Index
(RSI)-->20%
Ground Water Drought
Index (GWDI) -->0.16%
Steam Flow Drought Index
(SFDI) -->0.01.
%age w.r.t. LPA
Abnormal Weather
Parameter: (±) 20 or
more deviation
than the LPA.
- do -

Keeping watch over the
breaching of set triggers of
proxy indicators as
mentioned above.
Meeting of the DLMC to be
convened on breaching of
any one of proxy indicators
as mentioned above.
District Agriculture /
Horticulture / Revenue
Ofﬁcer (i.e. convener of
DLJC) Besides, if
IC notices the occurrence
of prevented sowing /
failure of sowing / planting /
germination, then they can
also report and appeal to
DLMC for invoking the
clause under the provision.

Meeting of the DLMC to
be convened with relevant
data, to be placed before
the Committee and
decision preferably be
taken at-least 15 days
before the date of invoking
this seasonal event.
3
www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY
Sample survey for the
assessment of more than
75% affected sown area in
the notiﬁed insurance unit
area and submission of
recommendation along
with supporting weather/
remote sensing indices,
loss survey reports, other
data and documentary
proofs to State/ UT Nodal
Department.
To be done by DLMC. Within 7 days of
meeting of DLMC.4
Issue of the notiﬁcation to
invoke the provision of
prevented sowing &
failure of sowing / planting /
germination.
State/ UT
Nodal Department.
Within 7 days from
receipt of loss
assessment survey
report of DLMC.
5
Within 15 days from the
cut-off date for enrolment
of farmers. This should be
processed on a parallel
basis with the survey and
issuance of notiﬁcation.
Supply of the details of
farmers & area insured
along with total premium
(farmers share &
Government subsidy)
debited to the Insurance
Company. This is
prerequisite for making
payment.
Banks (loanee &
non-loanee) and
Intermediaries
(non-loanee).
6
Dispute/Disagreement of
any stakeholder on the
process of Loss
Assessment Survey or
Extent of assessed loss.
By any stakeholder.
Written notice within 7 days
to Chairman-DLMC with
proofs/data/reports
substantiating the claim.
DLMC to review the
reports/evidences and
resolve the dispute within
7 days. In case the dispute
is still unresolved, the
affected stakeholder can
make appeal to State
Nodal Department,
thereafter to STAC, as per
process deﬁned in
Grievance Redressal
mechanism.
7
Sl. No. Action required to
be taken
Schedule for taking
action
Action to be
taken by
65

Assessment of likely
claim based on
notiﬁcation issued by
State Nodal Department.
8
9
Within one month of the
notiﬁcation invoking this
provision subject to receipt st
of 1 instalment of
advance Government
Subsidy
(both State and Central
Government).
Payment to eligible farmers
(25% of sum insured), and
insurance coverage for the
crop-IU gets over. No other
claim after payment under
this provision will be
applicable even to those
farmers whose crop
survived.
Insurance Company
www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY
Data pertaining to Loss
assessment report ﬁnalized
by DLJC and admissible
claims will be uploaded on
the NCIP against each
eligible farmer.
Insurance Company Within 7 days of
the Survey. 10
*Note: Normal Sown Area will be Average of crop-wise Actual Sown Area of immediately
preceding three seasons and will be made available by the concerned State
Government on NCIP.
21.4 On-Account Payment of Claims due to Mid-Season Adversity:
21.4.1 Insurance cover will be provided to the farmers to provide immediate relief in case
of adverse seasonal conditions during the crop season viz. ﬂoods, prolonged dry
spells, severe drought etc., wherein expected yield during the season is likely to be
less than 50% of Normal Yield.
21.4.2 Eligibility Criteria:
21.4.2.1 This add-on cover will only be available if this cover is notiﬁed by the State
Government.
21.4.2.2 All notiﬁed IUs would be eligible for "On-Account" payment only if the expected
Yield of the affected crop during the season in those IUs is less than 50% of Normal
Yield where normal yield will be determined as an average of immediately
preceding 7 years yield data.
21.4.2.3 The provision could be invoked for a speciﬁc crop or a group of crops in the notiﬁed
IU, by the DLMC/State Government on the basis of proxy weather indicators
supported by the joint loss assessment survey subject to fulﬁlment of the conditions
speciﬁed in the OGs.
21.4.2.4 The quantum of likely losses and the amount of 'on-account' payment shall be
decided based on the joint survey by representatives of IC, District
Administration/State Government Nodal Department and Farmers. In case of
dispute/disagreement between the stakeholders regarding the quantum/extent of
loss reported by the Joint Loss Assessment committee, the claim calculation will be
done using technology derived solutions involving weather/remote-sensing
indices along with loss assessment surveys with weightage of 70%: 30%
respectively for assessment and evaluation of the ﬁnal extent of loss. Acceptance
of the technology based assessment of the extent of loss will be binding on all
stakeholders.
Sl. No. Action required to
be taken
Schedule for taking
action
Action to be
taken bySl. No. Action required to
be taken
Schedule for taking
action
Action to be
taken by
66

21.4.2.5 STAC in coordination with SRSAC will conduct the yield estimation and
assessment of loss as mentioned in Para 21.4.2.4 based on the protocol
developed by MNCFC. STAC may take help of MNCFC if they desire.
21.4.2.6 Only those farmers would be eligible for ﬁnancial support under this cover who
have paid the premium / the premium has been debited from their account before
the happening of the mid-season adversity. Banks must ensure to debit farmers
premium within 15 days from sanction/renewal of KCC/crop loan of all eligible
farmers and well before the cut-off date for debiting the premium to provide beneﬁt
of this add on cover.
21.4.2.7 Amount payable would be 25% of the likely claims, subject to adjustment against
ﬁnal claims based on yield assessment data arrived through CCEs.
21.4.2.8 If adversity occurs within 1 month of the start of normal sowing (as per the
crop calendar/notiﬁed by States) and within 15 days before the normal
harvest time, this provision will not be invoked. In such a case, the losses will
not qualify separately under this provision but will be paid on the basis of CCE
based yield estimation data. State Government shall compulsorily notify the normal
harvesting time for notiﬁed crops including multi-picking crops district wise.
21.4.3 Proxy-Indicators: Indicators to be used for loss intimation could be rainfall data,
other weather indices, satellite imagery, remote sensing indices, drought
assessment reports of MNCFC and crop condition reports by the district level/
State Government ofﬁcials, supported by media reports and ﬁeld photographs. The
State's notiﬁcation should also spell out all the necessary details and the broad list
of indicators to be used in this regard.
21.4.4 Loss assessment procedure:
21.4.4.1 The Joint Committee of the State/District Administration/Nodal Department and the
Insurer (refer Para 21.3.5.11) for the assessment of crop damage have to be
formed and notiﬁed before the start of the crop season by the SLCCCI for
each district.
21.4.4.2 When it is perceived that a risk is triggered as deﬁned in the protocol for different
indices, viz. Weather, Remote Sensing, Hydrology, Soil Moisture & Insects/
Pest / Disease impact resulting into mid-term adverse impact on crops and thereby
qualifying for on-account payment of claims and if it is felt that the prevailing
conditions precedent for invocation of mid-season adversity have been breached,
the Chairman, DLMC on his/her own accord or on the directions of State Nodal
Department, as the case may be, convene the meeting of DLMC wherein the
weather/proxy indicator data of the indicators as indicated in Table 9 shall be
presented and discussed. If the Committee feels that the triggers for invocation of
mid-season adversity as mentioned above have been breached, then DLMC will
issue directions for convening a meeting of the DLJC for conducting a joint survey
of the crop-wise affected insurance unit and written notice may be issued to
concerned ICs for the Joint Survey. The report of the joint survey will be presented
in the DLMC/DLJC and with the recommendation of DLMC it shall be forwarded to
State Government for validation and issue of necessary notiﬁcation for invocation
of mid-season adversity.
21.4.4.3 The Joint Committee shall decide the eligibility for mid-term adversity declaration
based on the daily weather indices (available AWS notiﬁed by the
Government/long term average rainfall data/temperature data) satellite imagery
and remote sensing indices, Crop conditions, insect / pest / disease impact
indicating crop yield losses at notiﬁed IU level.
www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY 67

www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY
21.4.4.4 Based on these parameters, the Joint Committee will assess whether the provision
of On-account payment will be invoked and will call for a joint survey. A formal letter
has to be issued within 7 days from the adverse seasonal event by the concerned
District Administration/District Level Joint Committee for carrying out the joint loss
assessment surveys in affected IUs along with a list of such IUs.
21.4.4.5 Based on the above report, a joint inspection of the affected area shall be done the
IC along with the District Administration/Nodal Department ofﬁcials and farmer
representatives for ground truthing using mobile phone App and arrive at the extent
of loss by carrying out IU level sample loss surveys.
21.4.4.6 Information/ Services of MNCFC, ISRO or SRSAC may also be utilized for
determination of the extent of loss, using satellite data, for On-Account pay-out.
21.4.4.7 If the assessed loss of the affected crop assessed through Loss Assessment
Surveys is more than 50% of the normal crop yield for the Notiﬁed Insurance Unit,
On-Account payment would be payable within 30 days from the date of the
invocation of mid-term adversity.
21.4.4.8 On-Account payment would be calculated as per following formula:
21.4.5 Timeframe for loss assessment and submission of report:
21.4.5.1 A formal invocation of mid-season adversity through a formal letter will be issued
by the District Administration/Nodal Department of State Government asking to
carry out the loss assessment surveys with details of the affected IUs within 7 days
from the occurrence of adverse seasonal event.
21.4.5.2 Loss assessment report at the affected insurance unit level has to be completed by
the Joint Committee within 15 days from occurrence of the adverse seasonal event
and the loss report should compulsorily be uploaded on NCIP to arrive at the Claim
amount of eligible insured farmers from the Portal.
21.4.6 Conditions:
21.4.6.1 Mere disbursement/ sanction of loan without receipt/ debit of premium before the
notiﬁcation of the calamity would not make a farmer eligible for the claim.
21.4.6.2 The pay-out under the cover would be disbursed by the IC only after the receipt of at
least advance Government share of premium subsidy (1st instalment of both State
& Central Government).
21.4.6.3 On-Account payment would be paid to all eligible insured farmers within one month
of the notiﬁcation invoking this provision by the State Government and subject to
receipt of loss assessment report from State Government.
21.4.6.4 These claims would be adjusted against the end season area approach yield
based claims.
21.4.6.5 Banks would remit farmers' premium to the IC, with the farmers list, within 7 days of
the intimation of loss under this section, if not uploaded earlier on Portal. However,
this option must be exercised as a last recourse with proper justiﬁcation.
(Threshold Yield - Estimated Yield)
X Sum Insured x 25%
Threshold Yield
68

www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY
Illustration
21.4.6.6 District 'A' has been affected by ﬂoods having 100 insurance units under Crop 'X'.
Out of which 50 insurance units were severely affected and as per the weather
indicators / agro-met data, it has been assessed that 30 IUs could have yield loss of
more than 50% of the normal yield. Out of these 30 insurance units, estimated yield
loss against TY for 5 units is 80% (Category-I), for another 10 units, it is 70%
(Category-II) and remaining 15 units, it is 60% (Category-III) of normal yield. As per
declarations received, if sum insured for notiﬁed areas in Category-I, Category-II
and Category-III is Rs. 1 crore, Rs. 2 crore, and Rs. 3 crore, respectively, then likely
total claims will be Rs. 80 lakh, 140 lakh and 180 lakh, respectively. Hence
on-account claims upto 25% shall be Rs.20 lakh, 35 lakh and 45 lakh, which will be
released during the season subject to receipt of premium subsidy.
21.4.6.7 Detailed Procedure and Timelines for On Account Payment of Claims due to
Mid-Season Adversity is mentioned in Table 9 below:
Sl. No. Action required to
be taken
Schedule for taking
action
1
Action to be
taken by
- do -
- do -
Formation of District Level Joint
Committee (DL JC) under
Chairpersonship of DC/DM with
the following members for loss
assessment survey:
• District Agriculture / Horticulture/
Revenue Ofﬁcer - as Convener.
• Concerned Insurance Company.
• Representative of IMD from
nearest Observatory, if available.
• Representative of KVK /
Agriculture University.
• 3 representatives from district
farmers nominated by
Agriculture Department.
• District collector may
co-opt experts.
State/ UT Nodal
Department/
(SLCCCI).
It should be a part of main
Notiﬁcation to be issued by
State/ UT for
implementation of PMFBY.
The composition of
Committee should be
notiﬁed in the PMFBY
notiﬁcation by the State/UT
& ﬁrst meeting should be
held within a week after
notiﬁcation to familiarize
the members with the
procedure to be followed.
In case Government AWS/ARG
not available, Pvt. AWS/ARG can
be notiﬁed.
Tentative dates of crop-wise &
district-wise sowing & harvesting.
Details of month-wise
district-wise IMD's Long Period
Average LPA of rainfall.
Details of Government AWS/ARG
to be notiﬁed by the State/ UT for
implementation of PMFBY for
weather data supply including
rainfall to DLJC. State/ UT Nodal
Department/
(SLCCCI).
To be included in the main
notiﬁcation of State
Government itself.
After 1 month from normal
sowing and before 15 days from
the normal harvest time,
fulﬁlment of eligibility of
Deﬁnitions & interpretations
regarding proxy indicators
would be applied as per
IMD's guidelines as below
69

On-Account payment (i.e. 50%
yield loss in standing crops to be
compared with Normal yield in
notiﬁed insurance unit area as
explained in Para 21.4.2.2) is to
be decided based on occurrence
of any one of the proxy Indicators
occurring along with other proxy
indicators of:
%age w.r.t. LPA.
Abnormal Weather
Parameter:
(±) 20 or more deviation
than the Long Period
Average.
Deﬁnitions & interpretations
regarding proxy indicators
for drought would be
applied as per Drought
Manual 2016, i.e.
1. Rainfall Index:
Dry Spell: 3-4 weeks with
<50% of Normal RF
Rainfall Deviation: < -20%
of Normal RF.
2. Remote Sensing:
NDVI/NDWI deviation:
< -20%-30%
VCI Value--0-40%.
3. Crop Sowing:
Area Under Sowing:
Kharif < 33.3%, Rabi
< 50% of crop-wise
normal Sown Area*.
4. Soil Moisture:
PASM/MAI--0%-75%
5. Hydrology:
RSI-->20%
GWDI-->0.16%
SFDI-->0.01.
www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY
DL JC
• Severe Drought Condition, as
deﬁned in the Drought Manual,
2016.
• Dry spells and drought
declared by State/ UT.
• Abnormally Low / High
temperature in comparison to
LPA>20% deviation.
• Abnormally Low / High rainfall
in comparison to LPA > 20%
deviation.
• Widespread incidences of
Insect, Pest & Diseases
impacting > 25% crop sown
Area*.
• Any other deﬁned natural event
including ﬂooding which may
lead to widespread losses
impacting > 25% crop sown
area*.
Supported by Satellite Image
and Satellite Index based
outputs to be provided by
ISRO/SAC, MNCFC or any
other Government approved
agency, Government crop
condition reports, and Media
reports etc.
2
Keeping watch over breaching of
set triggers of proxy indicators
as mentioned above. Meeting of
DLJC to be convened on
breaching of any one of above
triggers of excess rainfall,
ﬂooding, deﬁcit rainfall and dry
spells, drought, high/low
temperature, Insect/
Pest-Disease.
3
District Agriculture /
Horticulture /
Revenue Ofﬁcer
(i.e. convener of
DLJC).
Meeting of DLJC to be
convened with relevant
data, to be placed before
the Committee and
decision should be taken
within 7 days from the
occurrence of adverse
seasonal event and
communicated through a
letter for conducting joint
loss assessment surveys
in listed IUs.
To be done by
DLJC.
Within 7 days of issuing of
letter for carrying out loss
assessment surveys
by DLJC.
Physical loss assessment survey
to be carried out for at least 5%
of crop sown area at 10 different
locations randomly spread over
Insurance Units (IU).
4
Sl. No. Action required to
be taken
Schedule for taking
action
Action to be
taken by
70

Within one month from the
date of DLJC letter to
carry out loss assessment
surveys subject to receipt
of at least 1st instalment
of advance Government
Subsidy (both State and
Central Government).
Assessment of likely losses &
amount of 'on-account' payment
based on the joint survey.
Payment to eligible farmers
(25% of likely claims).
Insurance
Company
6
7
Data pertaining to Loss
assessment report ﬁnalized by
DLJC and admissible claims will
be uploaded on the NCIP
against each eligible farmer.
Within 7 days
of the survey.8 Insurance
Company
Written notice within 7
days to Chairman-DLMC
with proofs/data/reports
substantiating the claim.
DLMC to review the
reports/evidences and
resolve the dispute within
7 Days. In case the
dispute is still unresolved,
the affected stakeholder
can make appeal to State
Nodal Department,
thereafter to STAC as per
process deﬁned in
Grievance Redressal
mechanism.
Dispute/Disagreement of any
stakeholder on the process of
Loss Assessment Survey or
Extent of assessed loss.
By any
Stakeholder.5
www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY
*Note: Normal Sown Area will be Average of crop-wise Actual Sown Area of immediately
preceding three seasons and will be made available by the concerned State
Government on NCIP.
21.5 Localized Calamity:
21.5.1 The Scheme provides for insurance cover at the individual farm level to crop losses
due to occurrence of localized perils/ calamities viz. hailstorm, landslide,
inundation, cloud burst and natural ﬁre due to lightening affecting part of a notiﬁed
unit or a plot.
21.5.2 For the purpose of indemniﬁcation of crop losses due to inundation as localised
calamity, Inundation is a situation where insured ﬁeld is covered or submerged by
water due to the rise in water level by rainwater that has fallen naturally from the sky
or from an artesian well or ﬂood water locally and where water stays for a prolonged
period and causes visible damage to the crop.
21.5.3 Eligibility Criteria:
21.5.3.1 This add-on cover will only be available if this cover is notiﬁed by the State
Government.
21.5.3.2 Available to all insured farmers, at farm unit level, affected by above mentioned
perils in a Notiﬁed IU growing notiﬁed crops for which insurance has been availed.
21.5.3.3 Maximum liability is limited to the proportionate Sum Insured of the damaged crop's
area and the pay-out under this provision would be in proportion to the cost of
inputs, incurred up to the occurrence of the insured peril.
Sl. No. Action required to
be taken
Schedule for taking
action
Action to be
taken by
71

21.5.3.4 State Government shall notify the predetermined input cost as percentage of the
total Sum Insured for different stages of the crop life cycle from sowing to
harvesting preferable at a interval of 15 days in the Notiﬁcation itself.
21.5.3.5 Only those farmers would be eligible for ﬁnancial support under this cover who
have paid the premium i.e. the premium has been debited from their account before
the occurrence of the insured peril.
21.5.3.6 If the payout under the crop yield estimation (based on CCEs data) is more than
localized losses, the higher claims of two will be payable to the insured farmers.
21.5.3.7 Proxy-Indicators: Rainfall data/ hailstorm/landslide/lightening (natural ﬁre)
incidences substantiated by reports in the local media or reports of the Agriculture/
Revenue Department supported by media Report and other evidences.
21.5.4 Loss assessment procedure:
21.5.4.1 Time and method of reporting the loss/claims:
A. Immediate intimation (within 72 hours) by the insured farmer as detailed in
Para 21.6.4.2 below.
B. Intimation must contain details of insured farmer's name, affected survey
number-wise insured crop and acreage affected, Farmer's Application No as
on NCIP, his/her Mobile Number etc. KCC A/c No. (in case of loanee farmer)
or Saving bank Account (in case of Non-Loanee farmer as declared at the
time of applying for crop insurance) for identiﬁcation and veriﬁcation purpose.
C. Premium payment veriﬁcation to be done from the portal and in case of need,
may be veriﬁed from the bank. The bank shall provide the payment
veriﬁcation within the next 48 hours of receipt of such request.
D. Mobile application may be used for reporting incidence of localized calamities
for intimation of events including longitude/latitude details and pictures using
Mobile App developed by DAC&FW.
21.5.4.2 Channel of reporting i.e. Whom to be reported: Intimation may be given within
72 hours by the farmer either directly through the "Crop Insurance App" or
dedicated toll-free number, Centralized Call Centre number of concerned
Insurance Company. The intimation may also be forwarded through the concerned
bank branch, local agriculture department Government/district ofﬁcials or through
the toll free number. The ﬁrst mode of intimation should be the "Crop Insurance
App" and the centralised Toll-Free Number for this purpose. This can be followed by
intimation through the Insurance Company's toll free number or through the bank or
district ofﬁcials to Insurance Company for conducting the individual level
investigations. The concerned bank/intermediary would verify the insured details
like crop insured, sum insured, premium debited and date of debit & remittance for
conducting the investigation/assessment.
21.5.4.3 Reporting of losses will be done through the Crop Insurance App and the
Centralised Toll-Free Number (once operationalized), along with other channels.
Other Channels will be phased out subsequently.
21.5.4.4 In case the intimation has been through the concerned bank branch or Government
ofﬁcials, the concerned IC should be informed within the next 48 hours.
www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY 72

www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY
21.5.5 Documentary evidence required for claim assessment:
21.5.5.1 Duly ﬁlled intimation / application of crop insurance app along with all relevant
documents is necessary for initiation of loss assessment and payment of claims.
However, if information on all the columns is not readily available, semi-ﬁlled form
may be sent to the Insurance Company and later within 7 days of the loss, the form
with complete details may be submitted.
21.5.5.2 The IC is responsible for ensuring that sufﬁcient number of loss intimation forms are
available at the bank branch/local Government ofﬁcials level. Any other additional
documents can be collected directly from the farmer at the time of loss assessment
by the representative/surveyor of the Insurance Company. Insurance Company
shall complete all formalities for the payment of such claims like local newspaper
cutting and any other available evidence to substantiate the occurrence of loss
event and severity of the loss, if any.
21.5.5.3 IMD report, Media report, Local Newspaper cutting to substantiate occurrence of
loss event and severity of the loss, if any.
21.5.6 Appointment of Loss Assessors by the Insurance Company:
21.5.6.1 The loss assessors would be appointed by the Insurance Company for
assessment of losses due to incidence of Localized Calamities. The loss assessors
appointed by the ICs should be in accordance with the IRDAI provisions. The loss
assessors appointed should possess following experience and qualiﬁcation:
• Diploma/degree in any subject with minimum 2 years relevant experience or
bachelor degree in Agriculture and allied subjects with one year experience.
• Retired Government ofﬁcials of Agriculture/ Horticulture/ Extension
Department having Diploma/B.Sc(Ag.) degree.
• Retired Bank ofﬁcials with experience of crop loaning or Kisan Credit Card
(KCC).
21.5.6.2 For compliance under the above provisions the ICs would utilize the empanelled
loss assessors for using their services as and when required.
21.5.6.3 The loss would be jointly assessed by a team comprising of loss assessor
appointed by the insurer, block level agriculture ofﬁcer and the concerned farmer.
Loss assessed by the Joint Committee at each individual ﬁeld level should
compulsorily be uploaded on NCIP to arrive at the Claim amount of the eligible
insured farmers from the Portal.
21.5.7 Time frame for loss assessment and submission of the report:
A. Appointment of loss assessor within 48 hours.
B. Loss assessment to be completed within the next 10 days.
C. Claim settlement to be completed in next 15 days (subject to receipt of
farmers premium& ﬁrst instalment of Subsidy).
D. Maximum liability would be limited to proportionate Sum Insured of damaged
cropped area within insured plot (s).
E. Intimation of crop losses is compulsory for individual insured farmers through
various channels in case of losses due to speciﬁed localized calamities. If the
73

www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY
intimation of crop losses due to speciﬁed localized calamities is received by
the State Government then they will enter the data of intimations of crop
losses in a form that can be uploaded in the NCIP and provide the same to
Insurance Company along with copies of the intimations received. The
Insurance Company will upload this data in the NCIP. The number of
intimations of the farmers will be compared with the number of insured
farmers in a notiﬁed insurance unit.
F. If the number of intimation as compared to the total cropped area for
that particular crop is less than 25%, then an individual survey of all the
farmers shall have to necessarily be done. This assessment shall have to be
done for each insured crop individually in the IU.
G. If the number of intimation as compared to the cropped area in the IU is more
than 25% area under the crop, then a survey of farmers will be done through
random selection from the intimation list of the farmers using a random
number table. The tentative sample size would be as under:
21.5.8 Conditions:
21.5.8.1 Mere disbursement/sanction of a loan without receipt/debit of premium before the
occurrence of insured peril would not make a farmer eligible for the claim.
21.5.8.2 When the affected area is limited upto 25% of the total cropped area in the notiﬁed
insurance unit, the losses of eligible farmers would be assessed individually
provided they have intimated and paid premium prior to occurrence of insurance
peril. The intimation is a pre-condition to get beneﬁt for the localized claim.
Intimation at the time of the survey would also be considered.
21.5.8.3 If the affected area under a notiﬁed crop is more than 25% of the total cropped area
in a notiﬁed insurance unit, all the eligible farmers (who have taken insurance for
the notiﬁed crop, which has been damaged and informed about occurrence of
calamity in the farm within the stipulated time) in the notiﬁed insurance unit would
be deemed to have suffered localized loss and would be eligible for ﬁnancial
support. The percentage of loss would be arrived at by Insurance Company
through a requisite number of sample survey as deﬁned in the detailed protocol for
area-based assessment and claim settlement.
21.5.8.4 The eligibility of claim settlement shall be decided based on the outcome of joint
loss assessment surveys carried out by representatives of Insurance Company,
District Administration/State Government Nodal Department and Farmers. Further
if the affected area is more than 25% of the total cropped area and there is dispute /
disagreement between the stakeholders regarding the quantum/extent of loss
reported by the Joint Loss Assessment committee, the claim calculation will be
done using technology derived solutions involving weather/remote-sensing
indices along with loss assessment surveys with a weightage of 70%: 30%
respectively for assessment and evaluation of the ﬁnal extent of loss. Acceptance
of the technology-driven extent of loss will be binding on all stakeholders.
21.5.8.5 STAC in coordination with State Remote Sensing Application Centre will conduct
yield estimation and assessment of loss as mentioned in Para 21.5.8.4 based on
Intimation (Cropped area under notiﬁed crop) Survey
Less than 25%
>25% to <=50%
> 50%
All Intimations would be surveyed
25% of the Intimations would be surveyed
30% of the Intimations would be surveyed
74

www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY
the protocol developed by MNCFC. STAC may take the help of MNCFC if they
desire.
21.5.8.6 The pay-out under the cover would be disbursed by the Insurance Company only
after the receipt of at least advance Government share of premium subsidy
(1st instalment of both State & Central Government Share).
21.5.8.7 The Insurance Company would disburse the claim, if payable within 15 days of
survey of loss.
21.5.8.8 If, at the end of the season, based on the yield data, the ﬁnal admissible claim is
more than the claim paid under this cover, the balance would be paid at the end of
the season under widespread claims.
21.5.8.9 Farmers getting enrolled or whose premium is debited after the occurrence of
insurance peril would not be eligible for ﬁnancial support under this cover.
21.5.8.10 Bank would remit farmers' premium to Insurance Company, with farmers list, within
7 days of intimation of loss under this section, if not uploaded earlier on Portal.
21.5.9 Illustration
• Sum Insured for a crop = Rs.30,000
• Assessed loss in the affected area due to operation of insured peril = 40%
• Claims Payable under this cover = Rs.30,000×40% = Rs.12,000
• End of season reported short fall in yield = 60% w.r.t. TY
• Claim estimated based on 'area approach' at IU level = Rs.30,000×60%
= Rs.18,000
• Balance payable at end of season = Rs. 18,000 - Rs. 12,000 = Rs. 6,000
21.5.10 Detailed Procedure and Timelines for payment of Localized claims is mentioned in
Table 10 below:.
Sl. No. Action required to
be taken
Schedule for taking
action
1
Action to be
taken by
Intimation may be given
within 72 hours by the
farmer either through
Mobile Application,
Centralized Toll-Free
Number, directly to the
Insurance Company
through it's dedicated
toll-free number or through
the concerned bank, local
agriculture department
Government/district ofﬁcials.
However, the ﬁrst mode of
intimation should be either
crop insurance app or the
centralised Toll-Free
Number.
Affected farmer(s) may
intimate using mobile.
landline or social media..
Farmer should provide his
bank account number
(loan account for loanee
farmer and savings
account for non-loanee
farmer) or Enrolment
number generated from
the portal at the time of
intimation.
Within 72 hours from the
occurrence of a peril.
75

4
Forwarding of information /
Intimation of the farmer(s) to
Insurance Company by either
using company's web link or
via NCIP.
Bank/PACS, Local
Agriculture
Department /
District ofﬁcials.
Within 48 hours from
the receipt of the
information / intimation
from the farmer(s).
2
Appointment of loss assessor as
per qualiﬁcations & experience
laid down in the OGs of PMFBY.
Insurance company
Within 48 hours from the
receipt of the
information / intimation.
Assessment of affected area in
term of % of area sown.
Jointly by the
Insurance Company
& block level
Agriculture Ofﬁcer.
5
DLJC Within 10 days of the
appointment of the loss
assessor by the
company.
Veriﬁcation of the details of the
affected insured farmer(s) from
the bank using company's web
link or on NCIP.
Within 7 days of the
intimation of loss.Insurance company6
Claim-payment to affected
farmers.
Within 15 days from
receipt of loss assessment
report subject to receipt of
at-least advance
Government share of st
subsidy (1 instalment of
both State & Central
Government).
Insurance company7
Individual level assessment of
loss (in case the affected area
is < 25% of the total
cropped area).
3
In case the intimation has been
given through concerned bank
branch or Government ofﬁcials,
the intimation should be given
within next 48 hours to the
Insurance Company.
Intimation about occurrence of
localized perils/ calamities viz.
Hailstorm, Landslide, Inundation,
Cloud burst and Natural ﬁre due
to lightening may be given upto
harvest date as notiﬁed in the
State Notiﬁcation and
supported by information of
IMD / local media, and Reports of
Agriculture / Revenue
Departments, Media Reports.
The losses due to occurrence
of localized perils within 15 days
of normal harvest will be
assessed based on combination
of sample survey and CCEs
with 50:50 weightage.
www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY
Sl. No. Action required to
be taken
Schedule for taking
action
Action to be
taken by
76

Data of the Loss
assessment report ﬁnalized by
DLJC, and admissible claims
will be uploaded on the NCIP
against the farmer from whom
the loss intimation was received.
8
Within 7 days of the
survey.Insurance company
www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY
Protocol for Area based Assessment: If affected area >25% of total cropped Area:
1 DL JC
Deﬁnitions &
interpretations of proxy
indicators would be
applied as per IMD's
guidelines as below:
%age w.r.t. LPA.
Abnormal Weather
Parameter: (±) 20 or more
deviation than the
Long Period Average.
Keeping watch over the
breaching of set triggers of
proxy indicators as mentioned
above.Meeting of the DLJC to
be convened on the breaching
of the any one.
District Agriculture /
Horticulture /
Revenue Ofﬁcer
(i.e. convener
of DLJC).
Meeting of the DLJC to be
convened. Relevant data
to be placed before the
Committee. The decision
should be taken within 7
days from the occurrence
2
Fulﬁllment of eligibility of
localized calamities/losses
on area-based loss
assessment (i.e. affected
area is >25% of the total
cropped area) is to be decided
based on the occurrence of
any one of the proxy
Indicators:-
• Wide-spread excess rainfall.
• Wide-spread ﬂooding/
inundation.
• Wide-spread cloud burst
and landslide.
• Wide-spread natural ﬁre
due to lightning.
• Wide-spread hailstorm/
hailing.
• Any other deﬁned natural
event including ﬂooding/
inundation which may lead to
widespread effect and losses
impacting > 25% of the crop
sown area*.
Supported by Satellite
Image and Satellite Index
based outputs to be
provided by ISRO/SAC,
MNCFC or any other
Government approved
agency, Government crop
condition reports, and
media reports, etc.
Sl. No. Action required to
be taken
Schedule for taking
action
Action to be
taken by
77
Sl. No. Action required to
be taken
Schedule for taking
action
Action to be
taken by

of the above triggers
of unseasonal rainfall,
cyclone or cyclonic
rainfall, and hailstorm.
of adverse seasonal event
and communicated through
a letter for conducting loss
assessment surveys
in the listed IUs.
Physical loss assessment
survey to be carried out for
at least the sample size
(mentioned in Para 21.5.7).
To be done by
DLJC.
Within 15 days of the letter
received for carrying out
the loss assessment
surveys by the DLJC.
3
www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY
Written notice within 7
days to be submitted to
the Chairman-DLMC with
proofs/data/reports
substantiating the claim.
The DLMC to review the
reports/evidence and
resolve the dispute within
7 days. In case the dispute
is unresolved, the affected
stakeholder can make an
appeal to State Nodal
Department, thereafter to
STAC, as per the process
deﬁned in the Grievance
Redressal mechanism.
Dispute/Disagreement
raised by any stakeholder
on the process of Loss
Assessment Survey or
Extent of assessed loss.
Any
Stakeholder.4
Within one month from the
date of the DLJC letter to
carry out the loss
assessment surveys
subject to receipt of at least
advance Government share st
of subsidy (1 instalment of
both the State & the Central
Government).
Finalization of of likely
losses & Payout.
Payment to eligible
farmers
5
6
Insurance
Company
Data of loss assessment
ﬁnalized by DLJC and
admissible claims will be
uploaded on the NCIP against
farmer from whom loss
intimation has been received.
Within 7 days of
the survey.
Insurance
Company7
*Note1: Crop damage should have occurred on account of inundation, mere water
logging without corresponding crop loss will not be considered.
*Note2: Inundation peril is not applicable in the case of hydrophilic crops like Paddy,
Sugarcane, Jute & Mesta.
*Note3: If affected area is more than 25% of the cropped area of notiﬁed crop in notiﬁed
insurance unit then the losses are not considered as individual and are presumed
to be widespread, therefore claim to all eligible insured farmers (who have given
intimation/for whom intimation has been received)would be paid ad-hoc for
such losses.
78
Sl. No. Action required to
be taken
Schedule for taking
action
Action to be
taken by

21.5.11 Illustration
• A - Sum Insured for a crop=Rs.30,000
• B - % area affected out of the total area insured = 100%
• C - % cost of input incurred till the occurrence of event on the basis of sowing
date & due to operation of insured peril as pre deﬁned by the State
Government in the notiﬁcation = 60%
• D - % loss estimated basis joint physical survey of insurance company and
district ofﬁcial = 80%
• E - Claims payable under this cover =A x B x C x D = Rs. 30,000 x 100% x 60%
x 80% = Rs. 14,400
21.6 Post-Harvest Losses:
21.6.1 Provision has been made for assessment of loss on individual plot basis in the case
of occurrence of hailstorm, cyclone, cyclonic rains and unseasonal rains resulting
in damage to harvested crop lying in the ﬁeld in 'cut and spread'/small bundled
condition depending on nature of the crop in that area kept solely to dry upto a
maximum period of two weeks (14 days) from harvesting. For indemniﬁcation of
post-harvest crop losses, the provision of damage of harvested crops due to
unseasonal rains shall trigger when the unseasonal rainfall is more than 20% over
long period average for the month for that sub-district/district. However, this is
subject to conﬁrmation of the damage in the joint survey to be conducted by
concerned State Government. and Insurance Company. The States/UTs have to
compulsorily notify the crops to be included under post-harvest losses along with
the harvesting window in the Bid Document, Notiﬁcation and on the NCIP. The
crops not falling under the aforesaid category/not included in the tender shall not be
included later for post-harvest loss cover.
21.6.2 Eligibility criteria:
21.6.2.1 This Add-on cover will only be available if this cover is notiﬁed by the State
Government.
21.6.2.2 Available to all insured farmers, at farm unit level, affected by above mentioned
perils in a Notiﬁed Insurance Unit, growing notiﬁed crops for which insurance have
been availed.
21.6.2.3 Available for all notiﬁed crops which has been declared eligible for post-harvest
losses as per the Government notiﬁcation and damaged by speciﬁed perils during
the process of drying in the ﬁeld in "cut and spread condition"/small bundled
conditions upto a period of 14 days from harvest. States/UTs shall also notify the
normal harvesting period of each crop.
21.6.2.4 Proxy-Indicators: Rainfall data/hailstorm incidences substantiated by local media
reports or reports of the Agriculture/ Revenue Department supported by media
reports and other evidence.
21.6.3 Loss assessment procedure:
21.6.3.1 Time and method of reporting the loss/claims:
A. The State Government would notify crop-wise and the agro-climatic zone or
district-wise normal harvesting dates/harvesting period during which, this
www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY 79

www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY
provision could be invoked. In the case of any event occurring beyond these
dates/this period, this provision shall not be applicable under any
circumstances.
B. Immediate intimation (within 72 hours) by the insured farmer to Insurance
Company through "Crop Insurance App" or any available channel of reporting
as detailed in Para 21.6.3.2 below.
C. Intimation must contain details of insured farmer's name, affected survey
number-wise insured crop and acreage affected, Farmer's Application No as
on NCIP, his/her Mobile Number, etc. KCC A/c No. (in case of loanee farmer)
or Saving bank Account (in case of Non-Loanee farmer as declared at the
time of applying for crop insurance) for identiﬁcation and veriﬁcation purpose.
D. Premium payment veriﬁcation to be done from the portal and in case required,
may be veriﬁed from the bank and bank shall provide the payment veriﬁcation
within next 48 hours of receipt of such request.
E. Mobile application based "Crop Insurance App" may be used for reporting an
incidence of a post harvest providing details of longitude/latitude and pictures..
21.6.3.2 Channel of reporting, i.e. Whom to be reported: Intimation may be given within
72 hours by farmer either through the Crop Insurance App or directly to the
Insurance Company through the dedicated toll-free number, Centralized Call
Centre number, concerned bank branch, local agriculture department,
Government./district ofﬁcials or through the Insurance Company's toll-free
number. The ﬁrst mode of intimation should be through the Crop Insurance App,
centralised Toll-Free Number, followed by intimation through Insurance
Company's toll-free number for conducting the individual level investigations. Crop
loss intimation may also be forwarded through bank or district ofﬁcials to Insurance
Company. The concerned bank/intermediary would verify the insured details like
crop insured, sum insured premium debited and date of debit & remittance for
conducting investigation/assessment.
21.6.3.3 Reporting of losses will be done primarily through the Crop Insurance App and the
Centralised Toll-Free Number (once operationalized), along with other channels.
Other channels will be phased out subsequently.
21.6.3.4 In case the intimation forwarded through the concerned bank branch or
Government ofﬁcials, the Insurance Company must be notiﬁed within next
48 hours.
21.6.3.5 Intimation of crop losses is compulsory for individual insured farmers through
various channels in case of losses due to speciﬁed Post Harvest Calamities. If the
intimation of crop losses due to speciﬁed calamities is received by the State
Government then they will enter the data of those intimations in a form that can be
uploaded in the NCIP or provide the same to Insurance Company along with copies
of the intimations received. The Insurance Company will upload this data in the
NCIP. The number of intimations of the farmers will be compared with the number of
insured farmers in a notiﬁed IU.
21.6.3.6 If the intimations of losses as compared to the total cropped area for that
particular crop is less than 25%, then a individual survey of all the farmers shall be
done. This assessment shall be done for each insured crop individually in the IU.
80

21.6.3.7 If the loss intimation in the IU is more than 25% for the cropped / sown area, then the
survey of farmers will be done through a random selection of the farmers from the
intimation list using the random number table. In this case, the losses will not be
considered as individual and will be presumed widespread. Therefore, the claim to
all eligible insured farmers (who have given intimation/for whom intimation has
been received) would be paid ad-hoc.
21.6.3.8 The tentative sample size would be as under:
21.6.4 Documentary evidence required for claim assessment:
21.6.4.1 A duly ﬁlled intimation form along with all relevant documents is necessary for
initiation of loss assessment and payment of claims. However, if information
against all the columns is not readily available, a semi-ﬁlled form may be sent to the
Insurance Company and later within 7days of the loss, the form with complete
details may be submitted.
21.6.4.2 It is the responsibility of the Insurance Company to ensure availability of sufﬁcient
number of claim forms at the bank branch/local Government ofﬁcials level. Any
other additional documents can be collected directly from the farmer at the time of
loss assessment by the representative/surveyor of the Insurance Company.
Insurance Company shall complete all formalities for payment of such claims
substantiating the occurrence of the loss and the severity of the loss, if any with
evidence from local newspaper cuttings and any other available valid source.
21.6.4.3 IMD report, media report, local newspaper cuttings, etc can be used to substantiate
occurrence of loss event and severity of the loss, if any.
21.6.5 Appointment of Loss Assessors by the Insurance Company:
21.6.5.1 The loss assessors would be appointed by the Insurance Company for
assessment of Post-harvest losses and ensure strict adherence to provisions. The
appointed loss assessors should possess the following experience and
qualiﬁcations:
• Diploma/degree in any subject with minimum 2 years of relevant experience
or a bachelors degree in Agriculture and allied subjects with one year
experience.
• Retired Government ofﬁcials of Agriculture/ Horticulture/ Extension
Department.
• Retired Bank ofﬁcials with experience of crop loaning or KCC.
21.6.5.2 For compliance under the above provisions the ICs would utilize the empanelled
loss assessors for using their services as and when required.
21.6.5.3 The loss would be jointly assessed by a team authorized by the Joint Committee. It
may comprise of the loss assessors appointed by the insurer, block level
agriculture ofﬁcer and the concerned farmer. Loss accessed by the Joint
www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY
Intimation (cropped area) survey
Less than 25%
>25% to <=50%
> 50%
All Intimations would be surveyed
25% of the Intimations would be surveyed
30% of the Intimations would be surveyed
81

Committee at each individual ﬁeld level should be compulsorily uploaded on NCIP
for claim calculation of eligible insured farmers.
21.6.6 Time frame for loss assessment and submission of report:
21.6.6.1 Appointment of the loss assessor within 48 hours from the receipt of information.
21.6.6.2 Loss assessment to be completed within next 10 days.
21.6.6.3 Claim settlement/payment to the farmers to be completed in next 15 days (subject
to receipt of premium) from the time of receipt of loss assessment report.
21.6.6.4 Conditions:
21.6.6.4.1 Mere disbursement/sanction of loan without the receipt/debit of premium before
the occurrence of insured peril would not make a farmer eligible for a claim.
21.6.6.4.2 When affected area is limited up to 25% of the total cropped area in the notiﬁed IU,
the losses of eligible farmers would be assessed individually provided they have
paid the premium prior to the occurrence of an insurance peril. Intimation is a
pre-condition to get the beneﬁt for localized claim. Intimation at the time of survey
would also be considered.
21.6.6.4.3 If the affected area under a notiﬁed crop is more than 25% of the total cropped area
in a notiﬁed IU, all the eligible farmers (who have taken insurance for the notiﬁed
crop, which has been damaged, and informed about the occurrence of a calamity in
the farm within the stipulated time in the notiﬁed IU) will be entitled to avail ﬁnancial
support under post harvest loss. The Insurance Company would calculate the
percentage of loss by conducting requisite number of sample surveys as deﬁned in
the detailed protocol for area-based assessment and claim settlement.
21.6.6.4.4 The eligibility of claim settlement shall be decided based on the outcome of the joint
loss assessment surveys carried out by representatives of the Insurance
Company, District Administration/State Government nodal department and
farmers. Further if affected area is more than 25% of the total cropped area and
there is dispute/disagreement between the stakeholders regarding the
quantum/extent of the loss reported by the Joint Loss Assessment committee, the
claim calculation will be done using technology derived solutions involving
weather/remote-sensing indices along with the loss assessment surveys with
weightage of 70%: 30% respectively for assessment and evaluation of ﬁnal extent
of loss. The acceptance of the technology driven extent of loss will be binding on all
stakeholders.
21.6.6.4.5 If the on crop yield estimation(CCEs) based claims is more than the claims
calculated against Post-harvest losses, the difference in the claims will be payable
to the affected farmers. If the claim calculated against Post-harvest loss is higher
than the affected farmers will not be eligible for a recovery.
21.6.6.4.6 The pay-out under the cover would be disbursed by the Insurance Company only
after the receipt of 2nd Instalment of the Government share of premium subsidy
(both State & Central Government Share).
21.6.6.4.7 The Insurance Company would disburse the claim, if payable, within 15 days of the
receipt of the loss survey report.
www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY 82

21.6.6.4.8 If the end of season ﬁnal admissible claim based on the yield data is more than the
claim under this cover, the balance would be paid at the end of the season under
wide-spread claims.
21.6.7 Illustration
• Sum Insured for a crop = Rs.50,000
• Affected area of the I.U.= 80% (eligible for sample survey)
• Assessed loss in the affected area/ﬁelds due to operation of insured
peril = 50%
• Claims Payable under Post Harvest loss = Rs.50,000×50% = Rs.25,000
• End of season reported shortfall in yield=60% in respect of the Threshold
Yield
• Claim estimated based on the 'area approach' at IU level = Rs.50,000 × 60%
= Rs.30,000
• Balance payable at the end of season = Rs. 30,000 - Rs. 25,000 = Rs. 5,000
21.6.7.1 Detailed Procedure and Timelines for payment of Post Harvest Loss is mentioned
in Table 11 below:
Sl. No. Action required to
be taken
Schedule for taking
action
1
Action to be
taken by
Intimation may be given within 72
hours by the farmer (s) either
through Mobile Application, the
centralized Toll-Free Number,
directly to the Insurance
Company through it's dedicated
toll-free number or through the
concerned bank, local agriculture
department Government/district
ofﬁcials. However, the ﬁrst mode
of intimation should be either Crop
Insurance App or centralised
Toll-Free Number.
In case the intimation has been
given through concerned bank
branch or Government ofﬁcials,
the intimation should be given
within next 48 hours to the
Insurance Company.
Intimation about occurrence of
hailstorm, cyclone, cyclonic rains
and unseasonal rains may be
given immediately after the event
and within 14 days after the
normal harvest date as notiﬁed
in the State notiﬁcation and
supported by related information
sourced from theIMD / local
media and Reports of Agriculture
/ Revenue Departments.
Affected farmer(s)
may intimate using
mobile, landline or
social media.
Farmer should
provide his bank
account number
(loan account for
loanee farmer and
savings account for
non-loanee farmer)
or Enrolment
number generated
from the portal at
the time of
intimation.
Within 72 hours from
the occurrence of peril.
www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY 83

Forwarding information /
intimation of the farmer(s) to
Insurance Company by either
using company's web link or via
NCIP.
Bank/PACS, Local
Agriculture
Department /
District ofﬁcials.
Within 48 hours from the
receipt of the information /
intimation from the
farmer(s).
2
Appointment of loss assessor as
per qualiﬁcations & experience
laid down in the OGs of PMFBY.
Insurance
company
Within 48 hours from the
receipt the of information /
intimation.
3
Assessment of affected area in
term of % of total cropped area.
Individual level assessment of
loss (in case the affected area
is < 25% of the total cropped
area).
Jointly by the loss
assessor, block level
agriculture ofﬁcer
and affected
farmer(s).
DLJC
Within 10 days of the
appointment of the loss
assessor by the company.
4
5
Veriﬁcation of the details of the
affected insured farmer(s) from
bank using company's web link
or on NCIP.
Insurance
company
Within 7 days of the
intimation of loss.6
Claim-payment to affected
intimated farmer(s).
Within 15 days from
receipt of loss assessment
report subject to receipt of
full Government share of
subsidy (2nd instalment of
both State & Central
Government).
Insurance
company7
Data of the Loss
assessment report ﬁnalized by
DLJC, and admissible claims will
be uploaded on the NCIP against
the farmer from whom loss
intimation was received.
Within 7 days of the
Survey.
Insurance
company8
Protocol for Area based Assessment: If affected area>25% of total cropped Area:
Deﬁnitions &
interpretations of proxy
indicators would be
applied as per IMD's
guidelines as below:
%age w.r.t. LPA.
Abnormal Weather
Parameter: (±) 20 or more
deviation than the
Long Period Average.
Fulﬁllment of eligibility of post
harvest losses on area-based
loss assessment (i.e. affected
area is >25% of the total cropped
area) is to be decided based on
the occurrence of any one of
the Proxy Indicators:-
• Wide-spread excess rainfall.
• Wide-spread ﬂooding/
inundation.
• Wide-spread cyclonic rains.
DL JC
www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY
1
Sl. No. Action required to
be taken
Schedule for taking
action
Action to be
taken by
84
Sl. No. Action required to
be taken
Schedule for taking
action
Action to be
taken by

Physical loss assessment
survey to be carried out for
at least the sample size
(mentioned in Para 21.5.7).
To be done
by DLJC.
Within 15 days of the letter
received for carrying out
the loss assessment
surveys by the DLJC.
3
Written notice within 7
days to be submitted to
the Chairman-DLMC with
proofs/data/reports
substantiating the claim.
The DLMC to review the
reports/evidence and
resolve the dispute within
7 days. In case the dispute
is unresolved, the affected
stakeholder can make an
appeal to State Nodal
Department, thereafter to
STAC, as per the process
deﬁned in the Grievance
Redressal mechanism.
Dispute/Disagreement
raised by any stakeholder
on the process of Loss
Assessment Survey or
Extent of assessed loss.
Any
Stakeholder4
Within one month from the
date of the DLJC letter to
carry out the loss
assessment surveys
subject to receipt of full
Government share of
subsidy (2nd instalment of
both the State & the Central
Government).
Payment to eligible
farmers.
5
6
Insurance
Company
Keeping watch over the
breaching of set triggers of
proxy indicators as mentioned
above. Meeting of the DLJC
to be convened on the
breaching of any one of the
above triggers of unseasonal
rainfall, cyclone or cyclonic
rainfall and hailstorm/hailing.
District Agriculture /
Horticulture /
Revenue Ofﬁcer
(i.e. convener
of DLJC).
Meeting of the DLJC to be
convened. Relevant data
to be placed before the
Committee. The decision
should be taken within 7
days from the occurrence
of adverse seasonal event
&communicated through a
letter for conducting loss
assessment surveys in the
listed IUs.
2
• Wide-spread hailstorm/hailing.
• Losses impacting > 25% of the
crop sown area*.
Supported by Satellite
Image and Satellite Index
based outputs to be
provided by ISRO/SAC,
MNCFC or any other
Government approved
agency, Government crop
condition reports, and
media reports, etc.
www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY
Assessment of likely losses
and ﬁnalization of claims
payment based on the
joint survey.
85
Sl. No. Action required to
be taken
Schedule for taking
action
Action to be
taken by

www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY
Data of loss assessment
ﬁnalized by DLJC and
admissible claims will be
uploaded on the NCIP
against farmer from whom
loss intimation has been
received.
Within 7 days of
the survey.
Insurance
Company7
22 Participation of Loss Assessors/Evaluators for Loss Assessment
under of the Scheme:
22.1 Empanelment Criteria:
22.1.1 The agencies having relevant ﬁeld experience, ﬁnancial and infrastructural
strength, sufﬁcient skilled manpower having Diploma in any subject with minimum
2 years of relevant experience or a degree in Agriculture and allied subjects with
one year relevant experience in crop loss assessment and having desired
operational capabilities shall be empanelled by the MoA&FW. This will be based on
the detailed criteria/SOP of empanelment of such agencies for carrying out the crop
loss evaluation/assessment across the country and shall be individually
engaged/selected by the concerned State Government/Insurance Company for
implementation of PMFBY. Agencies having infrastructure/capacity to provide
technical services like Drones/RST/mobile/web applications will be given priority.
22.1.2 Once loss assessment/evaluation agency has been empanelled by the DAC&FW,
it will be considered as a pre-qualiﬁed company to participate/engage with the
concerned State Government/Insurance Company to undertake loss
evaluation/assessment of losses under the provisions of the Scheme, however
concerned Insurance Company will be responsible for maintaining the quality of
services being delivered by such agencies.
22.1.3 Once empanelled, the performance of such agencies will be evaluated every
season against vital parameters deﬁning service and quality standards as
described below by the Committee headed by Joint Secretary/Additional Secretary
of DAC&FW and the non-performing agencies shall be de-empanelled for a period
of 2 consecutive seasons.
22.1.4 Detailed guidelines for the empanelment and accreditation of loss assessment
agencies shall be prepared by the Committee comprising of members from the
IASRI, NSSO, MNCFC, National Insurance Academy (NIA), Economic and
Statistical Advisor-DES, selected representatives from the empanelled IC,
GIC-Re, selected representatives from State Nodal Departments etc. These
guidelines will enable empanelment/de-empanelment of agencies based on set
performance parameters to maintain desired quality and standardization of
protocols and processes.
22.1.5 As loss assessment is a vital activity under the Scheme and forms the basis of
claims settlement, any malpractice/manipulation/misreporting will be taken very
seriously, and appropriate legal and administrative action will be taken against the
agencies and individuals associated with such agencies. Loss assessment
agencies shall follow the guidelines issued by the concerned authorities and will
share the details of individuals involved along with their mobile numbers with the
State Government and district administration.
86
Sl. No. Action required to
be taken
Schedule for taking
action
Action to be
taken by

www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY
Table 12: Criteria for Performance Evaluation and Ranking of Loss
Assessment Agencies
S. No
Service Level
Agreements
(SLA's)
Source of data Monitoring
method Periodicity Points criteria
CCE
Co-observance.
Computed from
the CCE upload
data in National
Crop Insurance
Portal.
Co-observance
of CCEs.
Based on the
CCE data
complied for
each season.
If 51% to 75%:
3 points
If less than
50%: 5 points.
1
Mid-term/
localized Loss
Assessment/
Post Harvest
Loss
Assessment.
List of mid-term/
Localized loss
assessment/post
harvest loss
assessment
reported on the
Crop Insurance
Portal.
Loss
Assessment
with the
timelines
prescribed
in the OGs.
Based on
the claims
calculated
each
season.
If partial timelines
are met: 3 points
If no timelines
are met: 5 points.2
Availability of
qualiﬁed and
requisite
manpower
at each
block/
equivalent
level.
Report from
National Crop
Insurance Portal
and veriﬁed by
the concerned
Insurance
Company.
Details of the
manpower
submitted on
NCIP and
veriﬁed by
concerned
Insurance
Company.
At least 15
days before
the enrolment
cut-off date.
If not appointed
before 15 days:
3 points
If not
appointed at all:
5 points.
3
Organizing
training/
capacity
building
workshops
as per the
guidelines.
Report from
Insurance
Company.
Report by
Insurance
Company to
State
Department
within 7 days
of the completion
of workshop.
At least 15
days before
the start of
each
season.
If not conducted
15 days prior to
the enrolment
cut-off date:
3 points
If not conducted
at all: 5 points.
4
District ofﬁce
established in
all the districts.
List of ofﬁces with
their contact
details provided
to the State
Department by
Insurance
Company.
District ofﬁces
are established
and staffed.
Within 30
days from the
award of
work/bid
opening.
If not set up
within 30 days
from the award of
work/bid opening:
3 points
If partially set-up
or not set-up at
all: 5 points.
5
Threshold Limit Severity
5-8 points
9-14 points
15- 22 points
1% of total service charges for the concerned agency for the season.
2% of total service charges for the concerned agency for the season.
3% of the total service charges for the concerned agency for the season.
5% of total service charges for a season, cancellation of renewal/
continuation for next season and de-empanelment.
Investigations against the loss assessment agency to be initiated& if
found guilty, the agency may face cancellation of renewal/continuation of
work for the next season and de-empanelment.
>= 23 points
False intimations
on any of the
above parameters
22.2 Performance severity of Loss Assessors:
87

www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY
23 Procedure for Settlement of Claims to the farmers:
23.1 The Insurance Company should have received the tentative ﬁnal share of
Government subsidy (2nd instalment), both Central and State, on the basis of the
business statistics ﬁnalized on the Portal after the 30 day period speciﬁed for auto
approval of applications to enable the settlement of Actual Yield-based claims
arising out of wide-spread calamity as well as post-harvest losses. However, for
the settlement of On-Account payment of claims, advance subsidy (1st instalment)
of 50% of 80% of the respective Central/State Government share in the
corresponding previous season should be released for the season/area(s) in the
case of claims against prevented sowing/planting/germination and localized
calamity.
23.2 Threshold Yield for all notiﬁed crops at each IU level shall compulsorily be a part of
the notiﬁcation for the season and shall not change at any point during that season.
Crop-IU wise historical Average Yield, Calamity Years, Indemnity level and
Threshold Yield shall be uploaded on the NCIP by the concerned State Nodal
Department at the time of the release of the notiﬁcation only and shall be veriﬁed
and accepted by the concerned Insurance Company within the given timelines. In
order to avoid manipulation/misuse of the information at ﬁeld level, threshold
Yield shall not be a part of public information before the payment of claims
for that season.
23.3 The DLMC will be required to upload/enter the details of crop loss as per the Joint
Loss Survey conducted by DLJC for all intermediate loss events viz. prevented
sowing/planting/germination failure &Mid-season Adversity on the NCIP. Similarly,
the crop loss details for localized losses and post-harvest loss events shall be
entered by the concerned Insurance Company on the Portal. Once the Actual Yield
data is available on the Portal, the same shall be veriﬁed and approved by the
concerned District/State authorities. For those experiments which were
conducted ofﬂine/without mobile application, the Actual Yield data (result of
optimization of CCE and 2 Step Yield Estimation process as deﬁned in Para 18.3.2)
shall be uploaded by the concerned District administration or State nodal
department on the NCIP itself. All the estimations of Yield / crop losses should
be compulsorily uploaded within the stipulated timeline on the NCIP by the
concerned stakeholders as envisaged above and the admissible claims will
be calculated on the NCIP. The status of claims and the claim amount will
accordingly be shared with the farmers through NCIP.
23.4 The loss reports and Actual Yield data shall be approved/reverted (in case of any
discrepancy/concern on the authenticity/correctness of report/data) by the
Insurance Company. Based on the loss reports and actual yield data, eligible
claims shall be calculated through the NCIP and accordingly the payment of claims
shall be initiated by the concerned Insurance Company and remitted directly into
the beneﬁciary account as per the pre-deﬁned timelines. The application-wise
payment details viz. amount, reference number, date etc. shall be
entered/synchronised with the National Crop Insurance Portal for future reference
and audit purposes.
23.5 In case of widespread calamity (end of season claims), once yield data is
received/ﬁnalized from State Government. as per the decided cut-off-dates,,
claims will be calculated on the National Crop Insurance Portal on the basis of the
declarations/ approved proposals & covered farmer's data received from the banks
/ channel partners / insurance intermediaries for each notiﬁed area and crops.
Accordingly, the claims will be approved by the Competent Authority of the
implementing Insurance Company and all claims will be initiated through Public
Financial Management System (PFMS).
88

23.6 In case the CCE data submitted through CCE Agri App is not approved within the
stipulated timelines, it will be auto- approved and used for claim calculation. In case
of non-submission of Actual Yield (AY) data by the State Government to the
implementing IC within the stipulated timelines, Synthetic Yield data computed
through a technology-based solution will be used for calculating admissible claims
and subsequent settlement of claims to the eligible farmers. The cut-off date for
submission of yield data to ICs is normally two months after completion of
harvesting of a particular crop.
23.7 In case of farmers covered by ﬁnancial Institutions, claims shall be released only
electronically through PFMS directly into insured farmer's given bank account,
followed by details containing claim particulars, to individual Bank Branches/ Nodal
Banks. Bank Branch should display particulars of claim disbursal on the notice
board to enable spread of awareness and inclination amongst farming community
through crop insurance. Insurance Company is required to compulsorily upload the
claim details against each insured farmer on National Crop Insurance Portal.
23.8 In case of farmers covered through intermediaries, payable claims will be directly
credited to the saving bank accounts through PFMS of the concerned insured
farmers and details of the claims will be intimated to them through SMS. The list of
beneﬁciaries and the claims amount shall also be uploaded on NCIP immediately.
23.9 In case of claims under prevented/failed sowing, localized calamities, post- harvest
losses; Insurance Company will process the claims after assessment and shall
release the claims as per detailed procedure given in the relevant sections above.
23.10 The claim settlement intimation shall be sent to each beneﬁciary farmer through
SMS from the NCIP. State Government, CSCs, Banks & ICs shall ensure accuracy
of the data before hand viz. Threshold Yield, Actual Yield, Insured Area, Sum
Insured and Indemnity levels etc. Responsibility of any error, omissions and
misreporting shall lie with the concerned State Nodal Department and Insurance
Company. State Government & ICs shall resolve all the grievances of the insured
farmers and other stakeholders in the shortest possible time.
23.11 In any situation, the State Government. cannot reopen/ re-calculate claims, 30
days from the time of claim settlement for notiﬁed crop(s) at the notiﬁed unit.
However, all States/UTs may compulsorily audit the calculation and payment of
claims to the eligible farmers at the earliest and complete the process within one
year. In the case of disputed claims/sub-standard claims, due to erroneous data,
the matter may be referred to State Level Coordination Committee (SLCC)/STAC
within this time and further to the Technical Advisory Committee (TAC), if required,
for consideration and decision.
23.12 All the documents of the farmers pertaining to payment of claims shall be veriﬁed
through PFMS and payment will be done through PFMS only. In the case of a
failed claims payment to banks it will be processed through the Aadhaar Enabled
Payment System (AEPS).
24 Important Conditions /Clauses Applicable for Coverage of Risks:
24.1 ICs should have received the premium for coverage either from the bank, channel
partner, insurance intermediary or directly. In case of any loss in transit due to
negligence by these agencies or non-remittance of premium by these agencies,
the concerned bank/intermediaries shall be liable for payment of claims.
www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY 89

www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY
24.2 In case of any substantial misreporting by nodal bank /branch with respect to
loanee farmers coverage which may include incorrect insured and sown acreage
and survey number details, bank account details & IU details etc., the concerned
bank only shall be liable for such misreporting.
24.3 Mere sanctioning/disbursement of crop loans and the submission of
proposals/declarations and remittance of premium by farmer/bank, without explicit
intent to raise the crop, will not constitute acceptance of risk by Insurance
Company.
25 Acreage discrepancy:
25.1 Some areas in the past have reported excess insurance coverage vis-à-vis
planted/ sown acreage, leading to over-insurance. Any discrepancy in coverage of
excess area should be handled at the individual applicant level along with their
Aadhaar Number to protect the interest of farmers with genuine insurance
coverage. All suitable measures shall be taken by concerned stakeholders for
de-duplication with the help of Aadhaar Number, land records, banks records,
revenue records and proposal/loan application of insured farmers. The details of
individual insured farmers are being collected on National Crop Insurance Portal
for de-duplication. Integration of digitized land records with the Portal is being
initiated to resolve the problem of multiple coverage on the same parcel of land.
Alternatively, details of the land record of each insured farmer is also being
captured on the Portal to facilitate processing and de-duplication of the farmers.
Any misreporting in acreage will be veriﬁed by the concerned Insurance
Companies with the land record available on the portal in case of non-loanee
farmers or from the concerned branches in case of loanee farmers.The scheme
also covers the risk of prevented sowing/germination failure which is not being
included in sowing areas furnished by the State Government for arriving at sown
area of crop during the season. Hence, the comparison of excess coverage with
the sown area is not justiﬁable. However, misreporting of area insured, land not
available for cultivation or farmers not sowing/non- intent to sow/declare the crops
in the application etc. should be veriﬁed, eliminated/de-duplicated from the
coverage. The State Government/Insurance company may take appropriate
measures for veriﬁcation of land/area sown at ground level. The Scheme also
provides for the option to change the insured crop by the insured farmers. Hence,
Bank Branches and other agencies may publicize this provision adequately along
with the consequences of over insurance/malpractices in advance amongst the
farmers.
25.1.1 The ICs should also verify sufﬁcient number of insured land/locations for each
notiﬁed major crop by visiting those Insured ﬁelds and report the same though
android app to MoA&FW/MNCFC.

25.1.2 Under the scheme, notiﬁed crops are being insured by the Insurance Companies
on the basis of actuarial premium rate, hence, it is not their prerogative to reduce
the Sum Insured and resultant claims on the application of ACF. However, to
rationalize the government subsidy, it the responsibility of all concerned
stakeholders including farmers and ﬁnancial institutions to insure the crop which
the farmer actually intends to sow or is sown. The option to change the insured
crop has also been provided under the scheme for reporting of crop(s) actually
sown for the insurance. There is also a provision to indemnify the crop losses due to
the localized perils on the basis of a survey of individual plot/ﬁeld under insured
crops. Incorrect reporting of insured crops i.e. if the crop actually sown and insured
are different, may lead to forfeiting of claims.
90

25.2 Any case of large scale irregularities/anomalies regarding insurance of excess
area i.e. more than the published cultivable area at Taluka level/abnormally high
insured area as compared to previous years should compulsorily be brought to the
notice of the State Government and MoA&FW. This should be submitted in writing
after the cut-off date of enrolment but before the period speciﬁed for reconciliation
with banks/other agencies along with facts/documents and the list of bank
branches etc so that the same may be examined by the State Government and
rectiﬁed by the concerned bank/agencies itself before ﬁnalisation of business
Statistics for the season on Portal.
25.3 In spite of all suitable measures taken by the Insurance Company for
de-duplication / elimination of ghost farmers/ Excess area insured by the individual
farmers, all Insurance Companies have to necessarily report excess insured area
in the prescribed format to the MoA&FW well before the start of crop cutting
experiments for veriﬁcation of the claims made by concerned Insurance Company
and for taking necessary corrective measures, if required. It is the responsibility of
the Insurance Company to verify the sown area before the time prescribed for auto
approval of application. In case of any ﬁnancial loss incurred by the Government in
respect to subsidy claimed against the non-genuine farmers, the Insurance
Company will liable for recovery and appropriate action will be taken. The decision
for application of ACF will be taken by the MoA&FW based on the ﬁeld reports
submitted by Insurance Company, thorough evaluation of the situation and the
decision of MoA&FW in regard to the applicability of discrepancy in insured area
shall be binding on all. The format for such reporting is given in Annexure-II.
25.4 If at all, ACF has to be applied in the case of established gross irregularities on
ground, until the land integration and real-time reconciliation remains in abeyance
for development, the MoA&FW will be allowed to apply the ACF only on those major
crops for which sown area at block/Taluka level is available as per the prescribed
Standard Operating Process as deﬁned below.
25.5 If the difference between insured area and sown area (maximum of preceding last
three years) is greater than 30% at the Block/Tehsil/Taluka level, the matter should
be compulsorily brought to the notice of the MoA&FW, GoI in the prescribed format.
The MoA&FW, will examine these cases. If required, the MNCFC will also be asked
to provide/validate crop area data for the same. The concerned Insurance
Company is required to provide requisite ground level data (at-least
covering 20 location per block) collected using the android app to the MoA&FW/
MNCFC to generate accurate area sown data at block/tehsil level. The data of the
revised insured area on the application of ACF, if any shall be uploaded on NCIP
as well.
25.6 Accordingly, after scrutiny, excess insured area, if any shall be treated as
un-insured and corresponding farmer's premium will be forfeited. The same will be
surrendered to the Technology Fund of the GoI and may be utilized for leveraging
technology in PMFBY to support technology-based solutions/research/Impact
assessment etc and towards assisting States to cover the cost of incremental
CCEs.
25.7 Premium subsidy refunded by ICs due to application of ACF shall be refunded to
the Central/State Government in their subsidy sharing ratio through fund
routing agencies.
www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY 91

www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY
26 Information Education and Communication (IEC):
26.1 Information, Education and Communication (IEC) and Capacity Building activities
through awareness drives, campaigns, trainings and handholding support are the
focus areas under revamped PMFBY. It is imperative to create awareness about
PMFBY amongst farmers and bridge knowledge gaps among various
implementing stakeholders. As ICs will be allocated business for three years from
Kharif 2020, they will have adequate time for awareness generation and building
capacities of the different stakeholders. Therefore, systematic management of IEC
and training activities is essential for a scheme like PMFBY, where multiple
stakeholders are involved at various stages of scheme implementation. The
primary target groups for conducting IEC and training and capacity building
activities are farmers, State level and district level ofﬁcials of the State
Government, Banks, Primary Agriculture Co-operative societies (PACS), Common
Service Centres (CSCs), ﬁeld functionaries and primary workers of different
departments and implementing ICs.
26.2 Major challenge in this is the multiple layers of hierarchy within each stakeholder
and their different levels of understanding about scheme implementation aspects.
Thus, IEC and training needs of the stakeholders are not uniform but vary in its
functional areas. Since, different stakeholders represent PMFBY to the farmers,
any deﬁciency in the knowledge or services greatly impacts the claim settlement
process. Since, the Revamped PMFBY is being implemented from Kharif 2020,
and has been made voluntary for all the farmers, it has become even more
important to generate awareness on the beneﬁts of the scheme, build trust in the
scheme and the satisfaction of farmers. Instilling behavioural change towards
creating an enabling environment in favour of the concept of crop insurance,
therefore, has great signiﬁcance in streamlining scheme implementation.
26.3 It requires sensitization of higher authorities of the targeted stakeholders at the
national/state/district level, massive awareness generation and error free
implementation at the ground level throughout the season. It equally requires focus
on all implementation aspects, right from scheme publicity, enrolment of farmers,
yield/loss assessment, claim calculation, claim settlement and addressing
grievances of farmers. Broad objective of IEC and capacity building is to build
overall literacy on crop insurance among the stakeholders and capacitate farmers
to take informed decisions.
26.4 Following would be the broad strategies that need to be focussed for desired
outcomes:
26.4.1 All IEC and Training and capacity building activities need to be carried out in three
phases. First phase will comprise of awareness generation at a mass level and
sensitization of key stakeholders at highest levels through sensitization
programmes. The second phase will comprise of engagement of stakeholders
actively involved in scheme implementation at the ﬁeld level through continuous
trainings and time to time hand holding support. In the third phase, greater
emphasis will be on developing long term synergy with apex training institutes for
knowledge management in crop insurance sector on a sustained basis.
26.4.2 At the beginning of each crop season, concerned ICs need to prepare a
stakeholder-wise micro level IEC and training activity plan and ensure strict
implementation of the same. The GoI will facilitate in ﬁnalizing the micro activity
plan in consultation with other stakeholders. It will also provide a standard template
detailing target groups, select activities to be undertaken, timeline, frequency,
responsibility etc. before the commencement of season.
92

26.4.3 The ICs to undertake an exercise of activity mapping and corresponding budget
allocation for IEC and Training. This would help in planning diverse activities with
maximum outreach and concentrating on few select activities with limited impact.
26.4.4 Adequate publicity and awareness generation needs to be conducted in all the
villages of the notiﬁed districts/areas by all the implementing stakeholders in
co-ordination with each other. All possible means of mass communication such as,
print, digital traditional and social media may be utilised to create and disseminate
awareness about the provisions and beneﬁts of the Scheme among the farmers
and the agencies involved in implementing the Scheme.
26.4.5 Awareness generation and training and capacity building activities need to be
carried out on regular basis starting from three months prior to the beginning of the
enrolment period till the claim settlement for a season. ICs need to start the work
immediately, within 15 days of award of contract and submit a comprehensive plan
to the concerned State Government and the GoI.
26.4.6 IC to prepare a dynamic social media calendar for generating awareness and
addressing issues raised on social media.
26.4.7 State Government to facilitate all the implementing stakeholders in organizing
training and capacity building workshops/sensitization workshops on key
implementation activities on crop insurance/revamped PMFBY/RWBCIS.
26.4.8 ICs should spend 0.5% of the Total Gross Premium for expenses on publicity,
awareness generation, training and capacity building activities at the ﬁeld level.
Implementing ICs need to submit corresponding details of expenses to the GoI and
State Government at the end of every season.
26.4.9 0.25% of the total Gross Premium out of the earmarked 0.5% of the total Gross
Premium will be pooled at the central level in the form of a knowledge repository
comprising of IEC and training material such as interactive videos, short ﬁlms,
training manuals, booklets, brochures, pamphlets, e-learning material and
courses, its designing and dissemination, and knowledgeable IEC specialists. This
would involve using existing infrastructure by engaging apex training institutes at
the national/regional/state level, etc. An advisory Committee will function under the
supervision of Joint Secretary / CEO-PMFBY, DAC&FW to plan and undertake
aforesaid activities.
26.4.10 The ICs shall deposit the unspent balance in the centralised IEC Fund of the GoI
within 3 months of the cut -off date for enrolment. However, ICs working in NER,
Hilly States and UT administration need to spend more on IEC and training
activities and any deﬁcits on earmarked allocation can be adjusted against the
savings of the earmarked pooled fund of 0.25% of the Gross Premium.
26.4.11 All the publicity material/information/training material should necessarily be
uploaded on the NCIP along with the coverage/frequency/duration date, etc for
better execution and effective monitoring.
26.4.12 Resources from central pool may be used to support the engagement of
apex/premier institutes at the national and state level having institutional
infrastructure and skilled human resources to impart training, developing
E-learning modules, organizing seminars, conferences, workshops on technical
aspects and conducting research on crop insurance for various stakeholders.
26.4.13 All the stakeholders to contribute in developing a pool of resource persons/master
trainers on the subject of crop insurance across the country.
www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY 93

www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY
26.4.14 ICs to contribute in building institutional capacities by providing training and
support to the Faculty Members of select apex/premier training institutes
(identiﬁed/empanelled by GoI) in the country. Infrastructure of these training
institutes may further be used for conducting trainings at its premises through
sponsorship and the provision of offering honorariums to faculties/resource
persons.
26.4.15 Strict monitoring and tracking of all the activities planned and executed by the ICs
at national/state level would be necessary for desired outcomes.
27 Service Charges:
27.1 Bank HQs and Bank Branches:
27.1.1 Bank and other ﬁnancial institutions etc. shall be paid service charges @ 4% of the
farmer's share of premium by Insurance Company for the farmers enrolled by the
bank branches, as generated from the Portal within the 15 days of the ﬁnalization
of business statistics. Rural agents engaged in providing insurance related
services to farmers may be paid appropriate commission as decided by the
Insurance Company, subject to a cap prescribed under IRDAI regulations. If there
is a delay in the payment of service charges by the Insurance Company beyond 15
days of ﬁnalization of business statistics, the amount needs to be paid with interest
@12% p.a. to Banks/FIs.
27.1.2 Even if the farmer's share of premium is contributed/ﬁnanced by the concerned
State Government. the applicable service charges on total farmers' share of
premium shall be paid by the concerned Insurance Company only.
27.1.3 The bank Head Ofﬁce for all its branches or respective bank branches separately
can request service charges from ICs. The Bank HQ or branches should
compulsorily enter the Goods & Services Tax (GST) number (Central Goods &
Services Fund (CGST) & State Goods & Services Fund (SGST) both) and details of
the bank accounts for remittance of bank service charge in the credential/login
page of the Portal to facilitate online generation of the bank service charge invoice
for the use of concerned Insurance Company and remittance of the same by them.
27.1.4 No service charges will be payable to the concerned bank/branch for the
applications involving anomaly/deﬁciency/misrepresentation of details/data and
has been rejected by the Insurance Company. However, service charges will not
be reduced/forfeited on application of the ACF.
27.2 CSC, BCs & Other Intermediaries:
27.2.1 Common Service Centres, Banking Correspondents shall be paid service charges
by ICs, as decided by GoI against the successful submission of each farmer
application form by them. This includes charges for submission of electronic data of
farmers along with uploading of the copy of Land Possession Certiﬁcate
(LPC)/Land records/ /contract document or any other document deﬁned by the
concerned State Government to identify share-cropper/tenant farmer, self
declaration of the intent to sow the proposed crop or sown crop/sowing certiﬁcate
as notiﬁed by the State, Bank Passbook upto 5 pages and printout of one page of
the premium acknowledgement receipt.
27.2.2 No service charges will be payable to the CSC for the applications for which any
anomaly/ deﬁciency/ misrepresentation of details/data is found and which have
been rejected by the Insurance Company.
94

www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY
27.2.3 The service charges/Insurance Commission shall also be paid by the concerned
Insurance Companies for enrolment of non-loanee farmers by Insurance
Agents/Intermediaries.
27.2.4 All payments of commission, rewards & service charges by the Insurance
Company will be subject to the applicable circulars and regulations issued by the
Ministry of Agriculture & Farmer's Welfare, GoI and the IRDAI from time to time.
28 Goods & Service Tax (GST):
28.1 Collection of premium under the Scheme is exempted from applicability of Goods &
Service Tax (GST).
29 Monitoring and Review of the Scheme:
29.1 The State Level Coordination Committee on Crop Insurance (SLCCCI) of the
concerned State will be responsible for the monitoring of the Schemes in its State.
However, a National Level Monitoring Committee (NLMC) under the chairmanship
of Secretary, MoA&FW will monitor the Scheme at the national level.
29.2 The following monitoring measures are proposed to ensure the effective
implementation of the Scheme during each crop season ensuring maximum
beneﬁts to the farmers:
29.2.1 The Bank branches/CSCs/ intermediaries may collect the details of individual
insured farmers (both loanee and non-loanee) like name, fathers' name, Bank
Account number, Aadhaar number, village, categories - small and
marginal/SC/ST/women, insured acreage, insured crop(s), sum insured, premium
collected, Government subsidy etc and submit the information electronically using
the web or CBS Integrated module along with the electronic submission of crop
wise consolidated declarations on or before ﬁnal cut-off date. Yield data based on
CCEs shall be made available online on NCIP to the concerned Insurance
Company by the State Government within a month from the date of ﬁnal harvest of
the individual crop.
29.2.2 The calculation of excess insured area if any shall be reported immediately after
the completion of coverage period/uploading of data of individual insured farmers
on the Portal but no later than the onset of CCEs. Similarly, any anomaly in the
actual yield data shall be brought to the notice of the concerned State Government
no later than 15 days from the ﬁnal receipt of actual yield data as detailed in
Section 25.
29.2.3 ICs shall calculate crop-wise, IU wise payable claims based on the actual yield data
and threshold yield given at the time of tendering. Accordingly, the payable claims
subject to payment of applicable premium share by the Central and State
Government for the season shall be remitted by the ICs directly into the beneﬁtted
farmer's accounts electronically. Payment details shall be updated on the NCIP on
a daily basis.
29.2.4 After the ﬁnalization of the claim amount from the concerned ICs, the same will be
shared with the ﬁnancial institutions/banks. They should display the list of the
beneﬁciaries/details of claims (both loanee and non-loanee) on the notice board of
the branch within seven days with the details of beneﬁciaries like Name of
farmers/beneﬁciaries, crops insured, sum insured, amount of claims received etc.

95

www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY
29.2.5 The list of beneﬁciaries (Bank-wise and insured area-wise) shall also be uploaded/
placed on the website of the concerned ICs with proper provisions and
mechanisms of public grievance redressal/feedback etc. The State/UTs should
ensure that crop insurance products provide comprehensive insurance coverage
to the farmers on sound insurance principles and provide the best value for the
premium. State Government may also review the progress of the Scheme
periodically and undertake impact assessment after the completion of each season
and send their suggestion/ recommendations to DAC&FW for making further
improvements in the Scheme.
29.2.6 About 5% of the beneﬁciaries may be veriﬁed by Regional Ofﬁces/Local level
Ofﬁces of ICs who will send the feedback to concerned DLMC and State
Government/SLCCCI on Crop Insurance.
29.2.7 At least 10% of the beneﬁciaries veriﬁed by the IC may be cross veriﬁed by the
concerned DLMC and they should send the feedback to the State Government.
29.2.8 1% to 2% of the beneﬁciaries may be veriﬁed by the Head Ofﬁce of the
IC/Independent Agencies appointed by the Central Government/NLMC and they
should send the necessary feedback to the Central Government.
30 Grievance Redressal Mechanism:
30.1 Each implementing State/UTs and empanelled ICs are required to compulsorily set
up a stratiﬁed and a robust grievance redressal mechanism with requisite
infrastructure upto the level of block/taluka to address grievances of all
stakeholders particularly insured farmers.
30.2 At the initial level, for grievance redressal, each district shall designate taluka and
district level grievance redressal ofﬁcer preferably Tehsil/Taluk or District
Agriculture/Horticulture Ofﬁcer to record &respond to the grievances of
Farmers, Banks, ICs etc. within 7 days of receipt of grievance. In case of
dissatisfaction, the matter may be brought before District Level Grievance
Redressal Committee (DGRC).
30.3 District Level Grievance Redressal Committee (DGRC): In line with the DLMC,
DGRC shall also be constituted for redressal of grievances of Farmers, Banks,
Insurance Company, District Authority/Department. This Committee will be headed
by the District Magistrate (DM*)/Collector and the representatives of Farmers,
Lead District Manager (LDM/Banks, District Development Manager (DDM)
NABARD, Insurance Company and concerned District Authority/Department (i.e.
Agriculture/Horticulture/Cooperative/Revenue/Agricultural Statistics etc.) shall be
appointed as members. This Committee may also invite subject specialists/experts
from University/IMD/commodity Boards/Research Institutions, SRSAC etc. if
deemed necessary. The DRGC will dispose the matter within 15 days. The decision
of the Committee shall be accepted by all the parties and in case of disagreement
with the decision; the same shall be represented to the State Level Grievance
Redressal Committee (SGRC) within 15 days from the decision of DGRC. In case
the DGRC doesn't take the matter for discussion within 7 days from submission of
grievance or the grievance has wider scope of effect impacting more number of
districts or there is a breach of guidelines by any of the stakeholder or the grievance
matter exceeds Rs. 25 Lakh in monetary terms, the matter may be directly raised at
the State Level Grievance Redressal Committee. Similar grievance redressal
committee should also be constituted at the block/Tehsil level under the
96

chairmanship of block/Tehsil level agriculture/horticulture ofﬁcer to facilitate the
district level grievance redressal committee.
30.4 State Level Grievance Redressal Committee (SGRC): States/UTs may also
nominate the State level Grievance Redressal Ofﬁcers at the rank of Deputy
Secretary/Director to register and dispose off grievances not in the purview of direct
registration by the District Level Grievance Ofﬁcer. The State shall also constitute a
State Level Grievance Redressal Committee for redressal of grievance of
Farmers, Banks, Insurance Company, District Authority/Department unsettled at
the level of the DGRC. This Committee will be headed by the Principal
Secretary/Secretary of the Nodal Department, SLBC/Banks, Chief General
Manager (CGM) NABARD, Insurance Company and the concerned State
Authority/Department shall be appointed as members. This Committee may also
invite subject specialists/experts from University/IMD/research
institutions/commodity Boards/, State Remote Sensing Application Centre, STSU,
STAC etc. if deemed necessary. The Committee will dispose the grievance within
15 days time of receipt of grievance. The decision of the Committee shall be
accepted by all the parties. The States/UTs shall notify the constitution of such a
grievance redressal committee and make wide publicity amongst farmers along
with the name, address, email ID and contact number of grievance
redressal ofﬁcer.
In addition, the States / UTs shall strictly comply and take the responsibility of the
following activities:
A. Strengthening of the Grievance Redressal Committee (GRCs) for resolving
the grievances at the ground level (Taluka / District level).
B. Required capacity building shall be provided to the ofﬁcials concerned with
Grievance Redressal and its timely resolution and disposal.
C. Systematic functioning of the Grievance Redressal Committees at various
levels with proper reporting mechanism and documentation.
D. Timely disposal of the Grievances and intimation of the status of disposal to
the complainant with proper tracking mechanism.
E. Avoiding procedural delays in channelizing the Grievances to ofﬁcials /
organisations for taking necessary action and strict adherence to the
timelines as per the clauses in the OGs.
F. Proper documentation of the Grievances and Disposal status shall be
ensured for further tracking by the State / Centre Governments and for RTIs or
by any such Government / Citizen rights mechanism as part ensuring greater
transparency and accountability of the Scheme.
G. The status of the grievance receipts and disposal shall be regularly updated
on social media handles of PMFBY maintained by the State/ UT and the links
of the same shall be made available to the implementing Department and
Government of India, for any reference.
30.5 National Level Centralized Grievance Redressal Mechanism:
A dedicated Centralised Toll-free Number should be set-up for query resolution and
grievance redressal. Any query or complaint of the farmer will be registered on the
NCIP against a unique ticket number. The ticket number will be shared with the
www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY 97

www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY
farmer through SMS indicating the tentative resolution timeline. Query or complaint
registered with the call centre will be further forwarded/displayed to the concerned
Stakeholder. The Stakeholder can forward it further down in the hierarchy or to
another stakeholder as required and provide the resolution/redressal within given
timelines. The solution/redressal shall be intimated to the farmer through
telephonic call and also through SMS generated by NCIP.
30.6 Grievance Redressal Mechanism by Insurance Company:
30.6.1 Each implementing Insurance Company will put in place an effective and resilient
Grievance Redressal Mechanism for resolution and disposal of all grievances
received through multiple channels viz. Centralized Call Centre, Toll-Free Call
Centre, Social Media, Tehsil Level Grievance Cell, DGRC, SGRC, IRDAI,
Insurance Ombudsmen, Banks, SLBC, Centralised Public Grievance Redressal
and Monitoring System (CPGRAMS), respective State Grievance Redressal and
Monitoring System (GRAMS) and similar entities and directly through farmer in the
form of application/complaint letter. A designated resource/manpower at each
tehsil level shall be equipped to handle and resolve grievances of farmers at local
level and he/she should be able to participate in Tehsil/Taluk level grievance
meetings and dispose-off the grievances.
30.6.2 Similarly, senior resource persons at the District and State level should be
equipped to participate in DGRC and SGRC meeting to resolve such grievances.
30.6.3 Insurance Company ensure that details of the grievance redressal ofﬁcers along
with the name, address and contact number and email id is publicized widely
among farmers. ICs will have to dispose the grievance within 7 day's time of receipt
of each and every grievance/complaint.
30.6.4 Insurance Company shall have to mandatorily prepare and submit monthly report
containing details of all such grievances reported and their disposal status to
respective Grievance Redressal Committees in the 1st week of next month.
30.7 Committee to examine the additional claims arising due to errors / omissions
/ commissions of the ﬁnancial institutions:
30.7.1 A committee will be constituted under the chairmanship of Chief Executive Ofﬁcer
(PMFBY)/Joint Secretary (Credit), DAC&FW with the representatives of Internal
Finance Division (IFD), DAC&FW, concerned State Government, ICs to examine
and settle the issues related to additional claims arising due to
errors/omissions/commissions of the Financial institutions specially in the
remittance of premium, uploading of information on portal etc to facilitate the early
settlement of claims to eligible farmers.
30.7.2 Committee will also invite the senior executive/ofﬁcers of concerned banks to
present their cases before the committee.
30.7.3 The Committee will take ﬁnal decision in this regard including recommendation for
the payment of admissible government subsidy to facilitate the payment of
admissible claims and/ or payment of additional/full liabilities towards admissible
claims by concerned ﬁnancial institution or concerned Insurance Company.
30.7.4 All the aforesaid committee constituted for redressal of grievances of the
stakeholders should examine and dispose of grievances as per the Revamped
Operational Guidelines. Any clariﬁcation / interpretation of provision of the
Revamped Operational Guidelines solely lies with DAC&FW, MoA&FW,
Government of India.
98

www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY
31 Empanelment and Selection of ICs:
31.1 Empanelment Criteria:
31.1.1 The Public Sector (AIC & others) and Private Sector General IC empanelled by
DAC&FW and selected by concerned State Government / Union Territory (UT)
shall implement the PMFBY. The IC mainly engaged in agriculture/rural insurance
business and having adequate experience, infrastructure, ﬁnancial strength and
operational capabilities are empanelled by DAC&FW. Once an Insurance
Company has been empanelled by MoA&FW, it is considered as pre-qualiﬁed
company to bid for the selection of Implementing Agency (IA) to undertake
implementation of the Scheme/Programme of MoA&FW.
31.1.2 L1 bidder shall not be permitted to surrender partial clusters/districts. If any
Insurance Company declines after being declared L1, it will be de-empanelled/
de-barred to implement crop insurance Scheme for the coming/next season(s) in
the concerned State and L2 may be given the cluster for implementing the crop
insurance Scheme at L1 district-crop combination rates and so on to L3, L4 bidder
with their consent. All Such bidders will be required to simultaneously furnish
appropriate reasons for withdrawal/surrender/non acceptance in writing to the
State Government. with the copy to the DAC&FW to enable further corrective
measures and appropriate administrative & legal action accordingly. Financial
losses, if any, to the State Government, in re-tendering due to withdrawal of
selected bidders, will be recovered from the withdrawing L1 bidder.
31.1.3 Each Insurance Company should compulsorily bid for any 4 NER, 2 Hilly States
and 2 UTs. Suitable penalty may be imposed to the defaulters by MoA&FW, GoI.
31.1.4 Core businesses such as Underwriting, Grievance Redressal and claim calculation
cannot be outsourced by the Insurance Company to any third party outside of the
organization. Suitable penalty may be imposed to the defaulters by MoA&FW, GoI
and will also send recommendations to IRDAI for taking necessary action in the
matter.
31.1.5 Since premium rate is being decided on the basis of transparent bidding process,
pre-bidding co-insurance will not be allowed. All companies have to inform such
arrangements if any in advance to the GoI and in such cases only one company will
be allowed to participate in the bid. If its found that more than one company having
co-insurance arrangements have participated and successfully qualiﬁed as
implementing agencies, then crop wise lowest premium rate quoted by these
companies will be applicable.
31.2 Selection Criteria of ICs as Implementing Agency (IA):
31.2.1 The selection of Insurance Company from the empanelled list of ICs to act as
Implementing Agency (IA) shall be done by the concerned States/UTs for
implementing the Scheme in their State. Selection of IA will be made by adopting
the cluster approach. In the case of smaller States, the whole State may be
assigned to one IA.
31.2.2 Before the commencement of the crop season, State Government would invite
the pre-qualiﬁed companies as mentioned in the preceding para through
open tender for submission of district-wise and crop-wise actuarial premium
rates in percentage of Sum Insured (ﬁnancial bid). Indemnity Level, Threshold
Yields, Sum Insured etc. will be the same for all ICs for the season. The
participating empanelled companies have to bid the premium rates for all the crops
notiﬁed / to be notiﬁed in the cluster by the State Government. Non-compliance will
lead to rejection of the bid.
99

www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY
31.2.3 Based on the district-wise and crop-wise actuarial premium rates quoted by the
pre-qualiﬁed companies, the total premium amount and weighted average
premium rates for cluster of districts will be calculated to arrive at L1. The L1 Bidder
will be selected to act as the Implementing Agency in the concerned cluster.
31.2.4 Selection of IC has to be made for three years as mentioned above. Ensuring
long-term continuity will facilitate the IC to build its credibility among the farmers by
investing its premium savings in various activities aiming at the welfare and
socio-economic development of the farmers like the creation of the facilities of
drinking water/ healthcare/education, farm levelling, Weather Forecasts, CSCs,
etc. It is also anticipated that long term continuity gives an opportunity to Insurers,
Bankers, State Government and other stakeholders to achieve a supportive and
collaborative interaction and business relationship and service effectiveness.
31.2.5 The insurance coverage in terms of the number of farmers and acreage should be
at least at the level of the corresponding previous season. In case of fall in
coverage, GoI may get the facts examined and if found at fault, it may impact the
ranking of the ICs and the State Government and warrant corrective action
including penal action by the Government.
31.2.6 The State Government may provide the requisite data about past yield of the last 10
consecutive years or more, threshold yield, crop-wise sum insured, indemnity
level, insurance unit levels, names of notiﬁed units, calamity years etc. in a digital
form by uploading the same on NCIP before ﬂoating the formal tender notice.
32 Clustering /Clubbing of districts for bidding by the State:
32.1 In order to diversify/ spread the risk and cover high risk/ low risk districts/ area
equally, the State Governments are required to group the districts/ area in such a
way that each group contains a mix of districts/ area with different risk proﬁles. Prior
to inviting the bid, the State Government, especially the large States have to divide
the State into multiple clusters of districts depending on the volume of risk
associated in the crops and district/areas proposed to be notiﬁed under the
Scheme. The purpose of clustering is to divide the States into different groups of
districts, so that expected sum insured (ESI) becomes low and risk is shared and
diversiﬁed. The States may form the clusters of districts based on mixed
agro-climatic zones. i) Districts of high risk and low risk areas, ii) districts of different
agro-climatic zones, and iii) ESI is of each cluster should be in similar order.
The district having a very high risks exposure may be divided into clusters,
combining few blocks as a cluster. However, while dividing the District in more than
one clusters, administrative convenience may also be considered. Prior to the bid
invitation, details on the cluster formation may also be made available to the ICs.
32.2 The objectives of Clustering/ Clubbing of districts should be done to achieve
the following objectives:
A. Cluster formation shall be applicable for upto 3 years and shall not be
changed during the contract period. Different Clusters may be deﬁned based
on the risk proﬁle of the district so as to increase the diversiﬁcation of risk
within a cluster and enable risk spreading for insurer.

B. Cluster may contain districts with mixed agro-climatic zones so as to increase
the diversiﬁcation of a risk within a cluster.
C. Crop-wise associated risk may also be diversiﬁed among the clusters and
shall be factored in cluster formation.
100

www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY
32.3 Hence, one of the major requirements of clustering is the risk analysis of different
districts. For the purpose of clustering/clubbing of districts and determination of L1
bidder, the risk is analyzed based on the long-term data of yield by (a) computing
the average burn cost (percent difference between actual yield and threshold yield)
and b) computing the level of variability in the long-term yield. Since, availability of
high quality long-term yield data is difﬁcult, especially at the lower administrative
level, other methods (including the use of satellite data) can be tried for
risk assessment.
32.4 Satellite data, of moderate resolution (e.g. Resourcesat, Advanced Wide Field
Sensor (AWiFS), Terra/Aqua MODIS) are available, for the long-term, i.e. at least
around 15 years. The long-term Vegetation Indices, which are indicators of crop
health, derived from these satellites can be used to assess the year to year
variations and thereby understanding the risk potential of an area. It can be
combined with many other satellite derived products, such as ﬂood maps, drought
assessments and vulnerability and long-term weather data to carry out the risk
analysis. States are advised to take the support of concerned National or State
level research organizations (e.g. ISRO- NRSC/SAC, MNCFC, SRSAC, SAUs,
etc.), to use the above mentioned technology for carrying out risk analysis of the
Districts/ Talukas/ Blocks towards improvement in clustering.
32.5 The above listed approaches are only to provide guidance to the States. The State
Governments are free to follow the recommended approaches or any other method
devised by them however, ensuring that the DAC&FW is intimated.
32.6 The detail illustration for classiﬁcation of risks, clubbing/clustering of risks and
districts and determination of L1 bidder are at Annexure-III.
33 Assessment of Performance and De-empanelment of Insurance
Companies:
33.1 The performance of the empanelled ICs shall be closely monitored by the
concerned Nodal Department of the State Government at the end of the completion
of each 1 year interval comprising of atleast two crop seasons i.e. Kharif and Rabi
through ascertaining the company's skills, commitment and efﬁciencies for
providing cost effective and efﬁcient insurance services to farmers. For the
purpose, a detailed performance evaluation matrix containing key performance
indicators with assigned weightage has been worked out and is as given
at Annexure -IV.
33.2 The Nodal department at the end of two complete seasons of a year may initiate
performance evaluation of the ICs working in their state on the speciﬁc parameters
as prescribed in the Insurance Company's Performance Evaluation Matrix as
outlined in Annexure-IV and complete the activity as per timelines deﬁned in the
Seasonal Discipline, i.e. within 1 month each year.
33.3 The base data to be used for the evaluation shall be extracted from NCIP. The
Nodal department will share their evaluation report with respective Insurance
Company by 20th of the month for their comments and conﬁrmation. Each
Insurance Company should be given enough opportunity to present their views and
substantiate their observations with valid data/proofs. Nodal Department shall
evaluate such additional data/proofs submitted by Insurance Company and
accordingly review their evaluation report and submit to MoA&FW, GoI latest by
31st July each year.
101

www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY
33.4 MoA&FW, GoI will have the ﬁnal authority to implement/execute the performance
evaluation report after thorough evaluation and validation of facts. MoA&FW, GoI
may ask for additional data/proofs from Insurance Company or Nodal Department
of State Government to substantiate the facts as stated in the report.
33.5 Once the Performance Evaluation report has been accepted and ﬁnalized by
MoA&FW, GoI, the corresponding actions will be taken by the Ministry along with
similar actions by the Nodal Department of the state.
34 Evaluation of Efﬁciency of Nodal Department of the State:
34.1 The efﬁciency evaluation of the State Nodal Department shall also be closely
monitored by MoA&FW on every 1 year interval through ascertaining the State's
efﬁciency and execution / implementation of the Scheme. For the purpose, a
detailed performance evaluation matrix containing key performance indicators with
assigned weightage has been worked out and is as given at Annexure- V.
35 Role and Responsibilities of Various Agencies:
For successful implementation and administration of Scheme, roles of various
Agencies/Institutions/Government Departments/Committees are spelt out herein.
35.1 Central Government:
35.1.1 Support and Coordination with the State/UT Governments for implementation of
PMFBY including awareness creation, publicity and the issuance of necessary
instructions/ guidelines from time to time for smooth and effective implementation.
35.1.2 Issue of directives to RBI, NABARD, Commercial Banks, RRBs and Cooperatives
for compliance with the terms and conditions of PMFBY and its operational
modalities.
35.1.3 Maintain NCIP.
35.1.4 Setting up of the TSU/CPMU with adequate infrastructure and expertise as deﬁned
in Section 15.
35.1.5 Constitution/Revamping of TAC as deﬁned in Para 19.3.
35.1.6 Facilitate States in strengthening of AWS/ARG network on PPP Mode by providing
50% fund for the same.
35.1.7 Release the advance premium subsidy equivalent to 50% of 80% of Central share
of premium subsidy of corresponding previous season under the Scheme to ICs
within 15 days of the enrolment cut off date for allocated clusters.
35.1.8 The balance of premium subsidy, for the season shall be released within 15 days of
ﬁnalization of district-wise business statistics by ICs on NCIP.
35.1.9 Review and monitor the implementation of PMFBY including premium rates,
product-benchmarking and other matters and issue necessary directives to ICs.
Review the performance of participating ICs and suggest modiﬁcations/
improvements wherever required.
102

www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY
35.1.10 Organize Capacity building training/workshops for the State Government ofﬁcials,
Banks, CSC and ICs. To Interpret the provisions of the Scheme and take decision
on matters of risk/ dispute in settlement of claims.
35.1.11 Provide necessary assistance, guidance and resources for adoption of new
technology for transparency, better administration of Scheme and timely payment
of claims to insured farmers.
35.1.12 0.25% of the total Gross Premium(out of 0.5% of the total Gross Premium
earmarked for awareness and publicity) will be pooled at the central level to build a
knowledge repository.
35.1.13 To review the performance of the State Government for effective implementation
of PMFBY.
35.1.14 Maintenance of Crop Insurance App. Ensure compulsory use of the app for
Localized Calamity and Post-Harvest Loss reporting.
35.1.15 To develop Technology related protocols including the protocols for Two Step Yield
Estimation and Smart Sampling Techniques, Optimization of CCEs and
Technology Based Claims settlement in case of delay in sharing of yield data by the
State Government.
35.1.16 Empanelment of ICs and agencies for Loss Assessment.
35.1.17 Interpretation of any provision of the Scheme, decision in any aspects of the
acceptance of risk / any dispute in settlement of claims and change in Operational
Guidelines / provisions, if required during the implementation period.
35.2 State/UT Governments:
35.2.1 To constitute the SLCCCI with adequate representation of all stakeholders as
detailed in Section 6.1.8. The composition of SLCCCI may be strengthened
suitably from time to time to give representation to all the concerned participants
including farmers in the implementation of the Scheme.
35.2.2 To set up and notify State level Technical Advisory Committee (STAC) and State
level Grievance Redressal Committee (SGRC) at State level.
35.2.3 To set up and notify the District Level Monitoring Committee (DLMC), District Level
Grievance Redressal Committee (DGRC), District Level Joint Committee and
District Level Steering committee for CCEs and to hold regular meeting and ensure
frequency of meetings at the district level.
35.2.4 SLCCCI meeting to be held well in advance to ﬁnalize clusters, issue bid notice,
selection of Implementing Agency and issuance of Notiﬁcation. Notiﬁcation of the
State Government shall contain all information as outlined in Section 7.
35.2.5 Take suitable action for adoption of new technology including Two-step Yield
Estimation Methodology, Optimization of CCEs and Smart Sampling Technique for
early loss assessment and better administration of Scheme.
35.2.6 Issue necessary directives to all agencies/institutions/Government
departments/Committees involved in implementation of Scheme.
35.2.7 Notify insurance unit area at Village/Village Panchayat or other equivalent units for
major crops. Unit size may be above the level of Village/Village. Panchayat Unit
size may be above the level of Village/Village Panchayat for other crops.
103

35.2.8 Furnish in advance insurance unit-wise (or of higher unit, if unit level data not
available) yield data of past 10 years of all crops notiﬁed under PMFBY, previous 10
years season-wise, crop-wise & IU-wise loss cost data, past 5 years season-wise,
crop-wise, IU-wise coverage and claim data and other relevant data as per section
& of the Operational Guidelines in soft copy format in English as per the formats
detailed in model tender document issued by GoI to ICs.
35.2.9 Issuance of necessary instructions to Regional Meteorological Centres of IMD and
other Government/ quasi Government agencies for supplying weather data on
near/real-time basis to Insurance Company.
35.2.10 Plan and conduct awareness and publicity three months prior to the start of the
coverage period, to maximize coverage of the farmers especially non-loanee
farmers in co-ordination with implementing ICs. State Government may also
earmark separate annual budget for the same.
35.2.11 Release advance premium subsidy equivalent to 50% of 80% of Central share of
premium subsidy of corresponding previous season under the Scheme to ICs
within 15 days of the enrolment cut off date for allocated clusters.
35.2.12 The balance of premium subsidy, for the season shall be released within 15 days
from the time of ﬁnalization of District-wise business statistics by ICs on NCIP.
35.2.13 Notify District-wise and crop-wise cut-off date for end of harvesting.
35.2.14 Submission of yield data for all notiﬁed crops and insurance units to IC in a standard
format in an electronic form (editable format) preferably on portal within the
stipulated timelines.
35.2.15 Assist IC for assessment of crop loss of the individual insured farmers caused by
localized perils and also assist in assessment of the post-harvest losses.
35.2.16 To undertake requisite number of CCEs in the notiﬁed area as per the GCES/State
manual. Provide the yield data to the Insurance Company within the prescribed
cut-off date, along with results of the individual CCEs.
35.2.17 Relevant documents may be provided to the IC only for those CCEs co-observed
by the ICs. It is only in cases of CCEs Co- observed by ICs, can objections be raised
by the company on any contradiction in yield data.
35.2.18 To notify district-wise and crop-wise seasonality discipline including normal sowing
dates and cut-off date for completion of harvesting.
35.2.19 To provide crop-wise, IU-wise data of normal area sown, crop-wise cost of inputs at
different crop stages and notify cut-off dates for invoking provisions of
prevented/failed sowing/transplantation/germination clause.
35.2.20 Approval of CCE data on portal and uploading of missing CCE data to facilitate
calculation of claims on portal.
35.2.21 Ensure mandatory use of Mobile Application/ other technology like RST for
improvement in the quality of CCEs and digitization of CCE-wise yield on NCIP.
35.2.22 To issue notiﬁcation for On-Account payment, for prevented sowing/failed
germination and in case of mid-season adversity if required.
35.2.23 Setting up of the State TSU with adequate infrastructure and expertise.
35.2.24 To provide ofﬁce space to implementing ICs at its district ofﬁce.
www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY 104

www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY
35.2.25 Undertake performance evaluation of implementing ICs, and calculate penalty on
ICs as per OGs.
35.2.26 Timely preparation, updation and digitization of Village level master (Location
master) on the NCIP.
35.2.27 Ensure no condition is enforced in violation of the provisions mentioned in the OGs.
35.3 National Technical Support Unit/State Technical Support Unit:

35.3.1 Monitoring of the implementation of Crop Insurance Schemes.
35.3.2 Calculation of Scheme-wise/season-wise/crop-wise Loss Cost.
35.3.3 Design & development of Weather Based Crop Insurance products for the crop /
areas based on the local weather conditions.
35.3.4 Appraisal / benchmarking and standardization of crop insurance products (weather
based) for various participating ICs.
35.3.5 Undertake the evaluation / impact / co-relation studies.
35.3.6 Capacity building and training of all the stakeholders engaged in crop insurance.
35.3.7 To provide technical input to Government & ICs regarding crop insurance products.
35.3.8 To develop methodology for assessment of yield including assessment through
remote sensing, suggest improvements in the method for yield assessment
through CCEs & other alternatives etc.
35.3.9 Development of integrated database for crop insurance.
35.3.10 Development of Internet / Web-enabled Evaluation & Management Information
System (E&MIS).
35.3.11 Other related works entrusted by the Central/State/ UT Government.
35.4 Insurance Companies (ICs):
35.4.1 ICs to liaise with State Governments. and Agencies/ Institutions/Committees
involved in the implementation of PMFBY and regular participation in meetings
conducted.
35.4.2 Undertake underwriting-responsibilities for processing and acceptance of risk
strictly as an in-house activity. It should not to be outsourced.
35.4.3 Claim processing / ﬁnalization on receipt of yield data from States/UTs and
payment within the prescribed timelines. Claims shall be remitted directly into the
designated bank accounts of farmers through the portal after the activation of
necessary module.
35.4.4 Obtain Re-insurance arrangements, if necessary.
35.4.5 To verify the bank/land records when claims are reported due to clerical
errors/omissions. This can be done only before the approval of claims.
35.4.6 Disclose details of the designated Agents in writing before the inception of
non-loanee farmers enrolment for the season to the concerned authority.
105

www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY
35.4.7 Ensure timely payment of commission/ service charges to banks/CSCs /BCs for
implementing the Scheme.
35.4.8 Awareness and publicity - undertake extensive efforts to create awareness and
generate publicity at the grass-root level including bank branches. Also coordinate
with the States and other agencies for awareness and publicity of the Scheme.
Refer to the IEC and Training activities detailed in Section 26 of the guidelines.
35.4.9 Provide requisite returns/statistics/information demanded by the Central and State
Governments.
35.4.10 Handhold Bank branches and facilitate their training and capacity building
especially in terms of timely digitizing details of the insured farmers with all requisite
details on NCIP.
35.4.11 Ensure intermediaries/ agents digitize the details of insured farmers and
beneﬁciaries with all requisite details on NCIP well in time.
35.4.12 Redressal of all Public Grievances within the time ﬁxed by the IRDAI. Maintain a
centralized farmer's help line number (Toll Free Number) to be used for addressing
the grievances of farmers. It will be based on a docket system with the provision of
forwarding the grievances to respective ICs for resolution. Maintenance of the
record of grievances received from different sources and its disposal.
35.4.13 The coverage of eligible loanee farmers should be carried out by ICs through the
banks/FIs. Coverage through agents/ brokers is not allowed.
35.4.14 Establish a functional ofﬁce at the sub-district level i.e. Tehsil/Block level in each
District and at least one agent should be deployed at each Tehsil/Block level ofﬁce
in the allocated Districts. The district ofﬁce be headed by the IC representative who
should be an Agri Graduate. Details of the ofﬁces at the district level including
contact number of the person should compulsorily be uploaded on NCIP.
35.4.15 Deployment of sufﬁcient manpower to co-observe CCEs and allied activities.
Ensure compulsory co-observance through CCE-Agri App.
35.4.16 At the beginning of each crop season, concerned ICs need to prepare a
stakeholder-wise micro level IEC and training activity plan and ensure strict
implementation of the same. Undertake IEC activities as detailed in Section 26.
35.4.17 ICs to compulsorily share the list of the beneﬁciary farmers along with the claim
details to the bank branches to be displayed for the information of farmers.
35.4.18 Develop crop-yield and weather data bases, along with related agri-insurance data
bases.
35.4.19 Provide necessary inputs to the State Government/SLCCCI as required as per the
notiﬁcation or otherwise.
35.5 Financial Institutions/Banks:
35.5.1 For purpose of PMFBY, scheduled banking institutions engaged in disbursing
Seasonal Agricultural Operations (SAO) loans/KCC loan as per relevant guidelines
of NABARD/RBI shall be reckoned as Banks.
106

35.5.2 Notiﬁcation, as well as other directives, guidelines, etc., shall ﬂow as Insurance
Company→ District Lead Bank/Administrative ofﬁces of Commercial
banks/RRBs/DCCBs →Service /Individual Bank Branch /PACS.
35.5.3 Communicate Notiﬁcation, as well as other directives, guidelines, etc. to all
agencies that fall within their jurisdiction.
35.5.4 Ensure that all agencies within their jurisdiction sanction additional loan
component to loanee farmers towards premium payable by them.
35.5.5 Adequate publicity for Opt out process and intimation of farmers. Record keeping
of all opt out applications.
35.5.6 Ensure that all service (subordinate) bank branches within their jurisdiction serve
all non-loanee farmers desiring and eligible to take insurance cover under PMFBY.
Such service will include opening of bank account of non-loanee farmers, guiding
them to ﬁll up the proposal forms, accepting premium from them and maintaining
records etc.
35.5.7 Ensure that the premium for both loanee and non-loanee farmers shall be remitted
to the concerned ICs and the related data is uploaded on NCIP within the
prescribed time.
35.5.8 Lead Bank/Administrative Ofﬁces of Banks should ensure that all farmers
sanctioned crop loans/seasonal operational loans/KCC loan for notiﬁed crop(s)
are necessarily insured (except for those opted out) and strict adherence of all
conditions stated in the Operational Guidelines of the Scheme. No eligible farmer
should be deprived of an insurance cover. Lead banks/ Administrative Ofﬁces of
Banks therefore, should make all efforts and pursue their branches for enrolling all
eligible loanee farmers and interested non-loanee farmers under crop insurance.
In case, claims have arisen during crop season then respective defaulting bank
and its branches would be made responsible to make payment of the admissible
claims to loanee farmers who were deprived of insurance cover.
35.5.9 Concerned Bank and its branches should ensure digitization of insured farmer
details on NCIP along with details of remittance of premium within stipulated time.
The consolidated premium of farmers' share will be remitted electronically
through the payment gateway of NCIP followed by the compulsory entry of
payment details on the Portal for proper and timely reconciliation by the ICs. If the
Concerned Bank and its branches are not able to remit the amount of premium
collected /debited within deﬁned timeline to the concerned ICs then they will be
liable to pay the admissible claims to farmers who are deprived of insurance cover.
35.5.10 The IC shall acknowledge the receipt of the farmers premium and reconciliation
reports submitted by the banks and any clariﬁcation/rectiﬁcation sought by ICs
should compulsorily be replied/addressed by the bank within 7 days. The banks
should cross check with their records and aberrations, if any, should be brought to
the notice of the IC immediately. If no response is received from banks within cut off
time/reconciliation period, the details submitted on the Portal shall be considered
ﬁnal and no changes would be accepted later on. ICs will thereafter may act as
deemed ﬁt as per applicable provisions.
35.5.11 The list of beneﬁciary farmers with claim amount shall be obtained from the
concerned IC by the Bank Branch/PACS to display at its branch and a copy shall
also be provided to the Chairman/ Sarpanch/ Pradhan of the village Panchayat.
www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY 107

www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY
35.5.12 To permit IC access to all relevant records / ledgers related to insured farmers at the
Nodal Bank/ Branch/ PACS for the purpose of scrutiny, if desired by them.
35.5.13 Banks should ensure that farmer are not deprived of any beneﬁt under the Scheme
due to errors/omissions/commissions of the concerned branch/ PACS, and in case
of such errors, the concerned agencies shall have to make good of all such losses.
35.5.14 To educate the farmers on the Scheme features, especially the voluntary nature of
scheme.
35.5.15 To guide the farmers on ﬁlling up the insurance proposal in the prescribed forms
and collecting the required documents, particularly in case of non-loanee farmers.
35.5.16 To collect Aadhaar Number and Mobile number of all eligible farmers well before
the start of enrolment/debit of premium.
35.5.17 Maintaining the records of the proposal/declaration forms and other relevant
documents and statements for the purpose of scrutiny/ veriﬁcation by the IC or its
authorized representatives and DLMC, if necessary.
35.5.18 To reconcile, validate and provide clariﬁcation, if necessary, on the coverage
details to the IC within next 15 days from the cut-off date for data uploading on the
NCIP and within 7 days of the receipt of such request from IC.
35.5.19 Debit /collect the applicable premium from the farmer's account on or before
cut-off-date and remit it entirely to the concerned Insurance Company
electronically.
35.5.20 Not to re-enrol the farmers under crop insurance for the same crop if the
State/District has notiﬁed prevented/failed sowing/germination.
35.6 Common Service Centre-Special Purpose Vehicle (CSC-SPV):
35.6.1 To ensure enrolment of non loanee farmers through its SPV/VLE.
35.6.2 To educate and train the VLEs on marketing and sale of crop insurance through the
NCIP and /or through concerned ICs at the District level.
35.6.3 To electronically remit the premium collected from the CSCs to the concerned ICs
in batches but no later than 3 days of receipt of premium from farmers.
35.6.4 To reconcile the premium from farmers to the concerned ICs in T+1 timeline.
35.6.5 To send the daily MIS of the premium remitted along with the summary of insured
farmers to the IC.
35.6.6 To reconcile the data uploaded on NCIP and premium remittance to the concerned
ICs within 7 days post cut-off date for enrolment of farmers.
35.6.7 To raise an invoice for pre-agreed service charges per farmer per crop-season
application to the respective IC on or before 10th of following month.
35.6.8 To ensure post sales services and facilitate grievance redressal of the insured
farmers.
108

35.6.9 Will be responsible for accuracy of details and document of individual farmers
uploaded on NCIP and liable for claim payment due to errors and omissions
committed by SPV/VLE.
35.7 Common Service Centres - Village level Enterpreneurs (CSC-VLE):
35.7.1 To educate the farmers especially non-loanee farmers on the feature of the
Scheme. While accepting the application from the individual farmers, CSC-VLE
will explain the provisions and provide details of the documents required. They
must also make the farmers aware of the consequences of incorrect submission of
information/documents. Further, they must ensure that all the documents
submitted by the farmers should be scrutinised thoroughly, veriﬁed and uploaded
on NCIP in legible form to avoid any anomaly in the coverage of that particular
farmer by Insurance Company.
35.7.2 To display the advertisement, publicity material, banner, poster, leaﬂets in its
premises for farmers as provided by the ICs/State Government.
35.7.3 To ﬁll up the online insurance proposal in the prescribed format and collect the
required documents from non- loanee farmers only.
35.7.4 Collect the premium on behalf of the implementing IC, strictly as per the provisions
of the Scheme.
35.7.5 To ﬁll up the correct details of non-loanee farmers and upload the requisite
documents along with their mobile number on NCIP. Due care should be taken in
ﬁlling up the details in the application form of each of the insured non- loanee farmer
and it should be cross-checked with the documents attached in the application.
35.7.6 The VLE should ensure that the insured farmers are not deprived of any beneﬁt
under the Scheme due to errors/ omissions/ commissions by them, and if such a
case is reported, necessary administrative and legal action will also be taken for
lapses in service/malpractices.
35.7.7 To issue acknowledgement receipt to the concerned farmer.
35.7.8 To facilitate post sales services, claim intimation and grievance redressal of the
insured farmers.
35.8 Designated Insurance Agents/Insurance Intermediaries:
35.8.1 To educate the farmers about the features of the Scheme.
35.8.2 To guide the farmers in ﬁling the insurance proposal/application in the prescribed
format and collecting the required documents along with Aadhaar Number and
Mobile Number from non- loanee farmers.
35.8.3 Collect the premium on behalf of the IC, as per the provisions of the Scheme and
issue acknowledgement receipt of proposal to the farmer.
35.8.4 To enter details along with requisite documents of the individually insured farmer on
NCIP, transfer the consolidated premium to the concerned IC electronically and
digitize the payment details compulsorily on the NCIP within the respective cut-off
dates. Insurance coverage will only be valid for those insured farmers whose
farmers premium is remitted electronically to the ICs and remittance details are
entered/ uploaded on NCIP within the respective cut off dates.
www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY 109

www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY
35.8.5 Ensure that the insured farmers are not deprived of any beneﬁt under the Scheme
due to errors/ omissions/ commissions., and if any, the Insurance Company shall
make good all such losses. Necessary administrative and legal action may also be
taken for lapses in service/malpractices, if, reported.
35.9 Loanee Farmers:
35.9.1 As the Scheme is made optional for all loanee farmers availing SAO loans/KCC
loans for notiﬁed crops, it is mandatory for all loanee farmers to submit a signed
declaration in case they want to opt-out of the insurance coverage under the
Scheme for a particular season anytime of the year but at-least 7 days before the
cut-off date for enrolment and premium debiting. In case no such "Opt-out"
declaration is submitted by the farmer for the season, he/she will be automatically
covered for the season. Any change in the crop plan should be brought to the notice
of the KCC/ agri-loan sanctioning bank-branch immediately but no later than 2 days
prior to the cut off date for the enrolment and premium debiting. This should be
supported by a sowing certiﬁcate issued by the concerned village/ sub-district level
ofﬁcial of the State.
35.9.2 All loanee farmers are compulsorily required to submit Aadhaar Number/copy of
Aadhaar card or authenticate themselves through Aadhaar enabled e-KYC along
with mobile number for enrolment under the crop insurance before the
prescribed cut-off date. All banks have to compulsorily take Aadhaar/Aadhaar
enrolment number as per the notiﬁcation under Aadhaar Act before sanctioning of
crop loan/KCC under Interest Subvention Scheme. Hence the coverage of loanee
farmers without Aadhaar doesn't arise and such accounts need to be reviewed by
the concerned bank branch regularly.
35.9.3 Insurance Proposals are accepted only upto a stipulated cut-off date, which will be
decided by the SLCCCI. Hence, loanee farmers may ensure from the concerned
bank branches that applicable premium has been debited and remitted to the ICs
within the cut-off date and details are uploaded on the Portal.
35.9.4 Give information of any loss due to a localized risk or a post-harvest loss due to
speciﬁed perils to the concerned bank branch/ ﬁnancial institution/ channel
partner/insurer within 72 hours.
35.9.5 Loanee farmer should not avail KCC/Agriculture Loan from multiple banks on the
same land or insure the same land through more than one bank or insure the same
land more than once as a non-loanee farmer. If any such cases are
reported/identiﬁed, the insurance cover will be terminated, the premium shall be
forfeited and necessary administrative and legal action may also be taken for such
malpractice.
35.10 Non-Loanee Farmers:
35.10.1 Non-loanee farmers desirous of availing insurance under PMFBY for any notiﬁed
crop in any notiﬁed insurance unit may approach the nearest
bank-branch/PACS/authorized channel partner/ CSC/insurance intermediary of
Insurance Company or directly ﬁll-up the online application form on the NCIP within
cut-off date and simultaneously upload/ submit the requisite documents and
applicable premium to concerned agency.
35.10.2 Applicants must sign/authorize electronically (along with copy of Aadhaar
Card/Aadhaar enrolment ID (if Aadhaar seeding/eKYC has not been completed)
110

www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY
along with the copy of LPC/Land Records/contract document or any other
document deﬁned by the concerned State Government to identify
share-cropper/tenant farmer, sowing certiﬁcate or self declaration of intent to sow
the proposed crop and copy of Pass Book to the Bank/Intermediary.
35.10.3 All non-loanee farmers willing to enrol through CSCs are compulsorily required to
submit mobile phone numbers and Aadhaar numbers. They must authenticate
themselves through Aadhaar enabled e-KYC for enrolment under crop insurance
before the prescribed cut-off date along with the copy of LPC/Land
Records/contract document or any other document deﬁned by the concerned State
Government to identify share-cropper/tenant farmer, sowing certiﬁcate or self
declaration of intent to sow the proposed crop, and the copy of Pass Book.
35.10.4 The farmer desiring coverage under crop insurance should open/operate an
account in the branch of the designated bank, and the details should be provided in
the proposal/application form.
35.10.5 The farmer should mention his/her land identiﬁcation number in the
proposal/application.
35.10.6 The farmer must provide documentary evidence with regard to the possession of
cultivable land.
35.10.7 To notify implementing Insurance Company in the event of change of crop or sown
area being different from the details declared in the proposal form, the CSC or other
channel.
35.10.8 The farmer must furnish area sown conﬁrmation certiﬁcate/self declaration of intent
to sow the proposed notiﬁed crop(s).
35.10.9 Non-loanee farmers being covered through other than online channels of CSC and
direct through NCIP etc. shall submit the duly ﬁlled proposal/application form along
with the copy of Aadhaar Card, Bank Passbook, Land Ownership proof /contract
document or any other document deﬁned by the concerned State Government to
identify share-cropper/tenant farmer, sowing certiﬁcate or self declaration of intent
to sow the proposed crop.
35.10.10 Non-Loanee farmer should ensure that the crop on the same land is not insured
more than once or insured through two different agencies. If any such cases are
reported/ identiﬁed, the insurance cover will be terminated, the premium shall be
forfeited and necessary administrative and legal action may also be taken for
malpractice.
35.10.11 Give information of any loss due to a localized risk or a post-harvest loss due to the
speciﬁed perils to the concerned bank-branch/ ﬁnancial institution/ channel
partner/insurer within 72 hours.
36 Enhanced Version of National Crop Insurance Portal (EV-NCIP)
for administration of Crop Insurance Program (www.pmfby.gov.in):
36.1 In the implementation of the scheme, multiple stake holders are involved from
enrolment of farmers to the claim disbursement to farmers. A hallmark of the
Scheme is leveraging technology adoption for the effective scheme administration.
In an endeavour to integrate technology in the implementation and execution of the
Scheme, the Ministry of Agriculture & Farmer's Welfare, Government of India has
designed and developed a National Crop Insurance Portal (NCIP)
(https://pmfby.gov.in) which serves as a centralized digital platform for all
stakeholders. The idea behind developing a web-based, integrated digital platform
is to speed up service delivery, unify fragmented databases, achieve a single view
111

of data, eliminate manual processes and thus provide faster insurance services to
farmers. This in turn will bring in better administration, transparency and
coordination amongst stakeholders viz., Farmers, States, ICs, Banks, Common
Service Centre (CSC) & other channels and real time dissemination of information.
The NCIP captures the entire data relating to insured crops and also serves as the
repository for the data relating to the crop insurance scheme.
36.2 The NCIP is being further enhanced to provide a single Information Technology
(IT) enabled platform for digitization of processes and information data bank and
dissemination mechanism, automation of administrative procedures, integration of
information and systems across multiple sources, information validation and
premium and claim calculation and remittance etc. This IT driven system aims at
addressing the issues which affect the current system of programme
administration, thereby reduce its efﬁcacy and lead to denial/ delay in beneﬁt
transfer to farmers viz. selective/layered information access, manual interventions,
multi-step procedures, documentary evidence/proofs, delayed/defective
information sharing etc. Hence, integration of IT platforms of banks, ICs, State
Governments. Yield/weather data providers, Land Records, UIDAI with National
Crop Insurance Portal directly or through interface for fetching in information is felt
essential to avoid errors for timely transmission of requisite information amongst
major stakeholders, early settlement of claims, proper monitoring and transparent
administration of the Schemes. Once the entire linking of IT platforms of all
stakeholders with the Web Portal is established, it would also lead to faster
processing of claims due to electronic ﬂow of information. Currently, this Portal is
available in two languages - Hindi and English and it will be converted into all
regional languages.
36.3 The conceptualisation and development of web-portal has already been
completed and launched and facilitates for the notiﬁcation digitization, farmers
application enrolment, application management, user management etc. subsidy
release management, claim disbursement and other functionalities are
proposed to be made available in the next version of NCIP wherein following
modules have been planned.
36.4 Modules of NCIP:
36.4.1 Integration of NCIP with the tech systems of the ICs using Block Chain
technology:
ICs are one of the stakeholders for the implementation of the scheme and
provide crop insurance to the farmers. Farmers' applications, entered into the
portal from different sources, are validated by the ICs and approval or rejection of
applications happen. The ICs have their own system to process the application and
claim calculation. Integration of NCIP with the internal tech system of the IC will
be done for the ﬂow of information to and fro in an automated manner over block
chain network. Block chain nodes shall be created at NCIP and at the IC's end.
Farmer Applications and other relevant details will be replicated to the respective
IC database. NCIP and IC's nodes shall always be in sync. Changes in NCIP node
will automatically update the information on IC node over block chain network.
NCIP node will be the primary source of data.
36.4.2 Integration with Public Fund Management System:
The NCIP shall be integrated with PFMS and a platform shall be developed for
managing ﬁnancial transactions to facilitate release of State/GoI share of premium
www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY 112

www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY
subsidy, account veriﬁcation and payment of insurance claims by the companies to
the farmers.
Online remittance of premium by Financial Institutions:
Data related to the farmers, having crop loan from Banks, is being entered by the
Banks on the portal and the corresponding farmer premium, which is deducted by
the banks, is remitted to corresponding IC. However, the transactions related to
such remittance are not executed through the Portal at present. Such transactions
take place directly from the Banks' system to the account of the ICs. It is proposed
to develop a platform for remitting the consolidated farmer premium by the Bank
branches to the ICs through a third-party payment gateway.
A third-party payment gateway will be integrated with NCIP for the remittance of
farmer premium by the Bank branches. The remitted amount will be added in a
wallet of the Bank-Branch. Bank-Branch can remit the amount multiple times. For
each transaction, an Unique ID (UTR) will be assigned. Branch will add the farmer
application against the UTR up to the UTR amount. As soon as an application is
added, the farmer premium amount of the application will be deducted from the
UTR amount and the balance amount will be shown.
36.4.3 Add-on Coverage of Crop Risk:
The State/UT has the option to notify Add-on Cover perils cover with or without
Basic Cover (Yield base cover). Selection of risk will be made available on portal as
per the provisions available in the guidelines. In the notiﬁcation module, option will
be provided to the States/UTs to select the add-on coverage separately according
to the crop and insurance unit along with the Basic Cover as per the notiﬁcation.
Claim will be calculated as per the add-on coverage opted for the crop and IU.
36.4.4 Change of Crop:
Farmers, having crop loan from ﬁnancial institutions, covered under the Scheme,
can change the insured crop upto 2 working days before the cut-off-date. Farmer
can raise the crop change request for the current season as per the revised
guideline through NCIP, Crop Insurance App, call centre or through concerned
ﬁnancial institutions. Intimation of the crop change request and its status will be
shared with the farmer via SMS. Also, interface will be provided on NCIP/Crop
Insurance App to check the request status. Crop change request will be displayed
to the corresponding stake holder for necessary action.
Due to crop change, sum insured, and premium will change accordingly. Changes
in application details due to change in crop will be carried out on the next version of
NCIP under which a crop change facility shall be provided. Option to manage
excess and short farmer premium will be provided and amount/area will be
managed accordingly.
36.4.5 Land Record Integration:
Land record detail is one of the major requirements under the PMFBY scheme.
Manual veriﬁcation of the land record data is a challenge. Many States/UTs have
digitized land record system, however their hierarchal system and practices are
different. DAC & FW is moving forward to integrate the States/UTs land record
system with NCIP to validate the farmer's land parcel with land record system.
States will share the land record API subsequent to which integration of land
records of the State(s) with NCIP shall be executed. The land record details of the
113

farmers will be entered during enrolment process and rest of the details shall be
fetched through the State land record portal. The user will be required to verify the
land record details.
36.4.6 Centralised Call Centre:
Ministry of Agriculture & Farmer's Welfare has setup Kisan Call Center for the
farmers. The services of Kisan Call Centre shall be utilized for PMFBY also. Kisan
Call Centre operator will access this application to answer farmer's queries.
Claim related query can be raised through this platform by Farmers. Information
available with NCIP is to be communicated to the farmers through the created
platform. Any information not available under NCIP can be logged and displayed to
the State and corresponding insurance company for providing the same to the
farmer.
Any query or complaint of farmer will be registered on the NCIP against a unique
ticket number. The ticket number will be shared with the farmer through SMS
indicating the tentative resolution timeline.
Query or complaint registered with call centre will be further forwarded/displayed to
the concerned Stakeholder. The Stakeholder can forward it further down in its own
hierarchy or to another stakeholder if the matter concerns some other stakeholder.
Query/Complaint will be resolved by the concerned stakeholder. Progress status
will be intimated to the farmer via SMS and the same will be updated on portal.
36.4.7 Integration with IMD/ Weather Data Provider:
Restructured Weather Based Crop Insurance Scheme (RWBCIS) is based on the
weather parameters for the claims. Weather parameter is provided by India
Meteorological Department (IMD) or other agencies notiﬁed by State. Integration of
IMD or other weather agency's platform with NCIP shall be made for faster claim
calculation. Term sheet digitization option will be incorporated in NCIP. The
option will be customized as per the request of the State Government. API based
integration between NCIP and the IMD/Weather agency identiﬁed by the State for
the sharing of weather parameters data to NCIP is proposed. Claims calculation
will be done for RWBCIS by the system based on the weather data shared by the
weather agency and the digitized term sheet.
36.4.8 Integration with Mahalanobis National Crop Forecast Centre (MNCFC):
To streamline the ﬂow of information amongst stakeholders, the portal will also be
integrated with the system/data being developed by MNCFC.
a) Settlement of Yield data disputes or disputes relating to crop loss.
b) ACF (Area Correction Factor) for insured crop for every season.
c) Satellite data-based Clustering.
d) Integration of smart sampling tool for CCE plot selection.
e) Integration of innovative technology driven approach for rationalisation
of CCE.
f) Integration with the technique that is being developed for estimation of crop
yield at gram panchayat level.
www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY 114

www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY
g) Cadastral level crop and land ownership veriﬁcation.
h) Smart Sampling technique and Optimisation of CCE: Integration between
MNCFC and NCIP through API.
36.4.9 Location Master Management:
Location master is the base for the implementation of the PMFBY Scheme. The
scheme PMFBY is based on the State's revenue hierarchy. The revenue hierarchy
is dynamic, differs from State to State and there might be changes from season to
season on account of re-organization of revenue units or creation of new units.
NCIP is therefore required to be equipped with related provisions to capture the
re-organization of the hierarchy.
Option for addition, amendment and deletion of revenue unit is being considered
under the revenue location hierarchy in the NCIP database. The option will work in
a maker and checker scenario. Stakeholders like Bank, CSC, Districts, etc. can
request for the addition of the location unit. State will verify the request and either
approve or reject. System will validate the request and display its analysis to the
States as a helping tool.
36.4.10 Conversion of data into regional languages:
Existing crop insurance portal supports 11 regional languages including Hindi.
However, the data is entered in English only. To support the multilingual data, it is
required to convert the data into State speciﬁc local language. Web pages of the
EV-NCIP will be made enabled in all the supporting languages along with English.
36.4.11 Monitoring Framework/MIS Reporting:
Module wise web reports for monitoring the progress of scheme on different
parameters.. Reports shall be drillable and printable till the lower level. Reports will
be developed with the development of the corresponding entry modules.
Comparative reports with earlier respective seasons on different parameters for
the users shall be available. Downloaded reports will have unique name as per the
report number with date and time stamp.
Search module will be available in each stakeholder's login on different parameters
like Policy search, Farmer search, Notiﬁcation search, Bank-Branch Search,
Location master Search, User Search etc. Further the search is to be made
available by sub attribute also. Advance Search will be available on sub attributes
of the parameters.
36.4.12 CCE Agri App:
Mobile application has been developed and is being used for capturing the CCE
data from the ﬁeld and for uploading on the server. CCE Agri app works in both
online and ofﬂine mode. CCE Agri app captures, From-1 and Form-2 data along
with geo-coordinated photographs. It is customizable as per the requirement of the
States. Further, following functionalities are to be enabled:
a) CCE schedule digitization:
State schedules the CCE for the insurance unit and crop. State selects the village
(If IU is at higher level) and plot (Survey/Sub Survey no.) randomly for conducting
the CCE. There will be two ways to select the CCE plot i.e. through smart sampling
115

technique or conventional method. In State's login, option to declare the randomly
selected village of the IU and survey number /sub survey number of CCE ﬁeld for a
crop. State will declare the locations for the selection of CCE ﬁeld according to
smart sampling technique or the conventional technique. In smart sampling
technique, the geo-coordinates and survey/sub survey number for the CCE ﬁeld
will be shared by MNCFC through API. The schedule of the CCE will be approved
by the State. The approved schedule will be available to the corresponding
insurance company for the co-observance.
b) Smart Sampling technique:
MNCFC will share the Geo-coordinates of the CCE ﬁeld through API and the same
will be shared to the CCE-Agri app based on the declaration done by the State for
the use of smart sampling technique. CCE app will validate the CCE primary
worker's geo-coordinate with the co-ordinates shared for smart sampling
technique. A signiﬁcant buffer distance between CCE primary worker's
geo-coordinates and smart sampling will be allowed.
c) State Speciﬁc customization:
CCE speciﬁcations may differ from State to State i.e. measurement units of CCE
ﬁeld, shape of CCE plot etc. State speciﬁc customization is required for the smooth
implementation of CCE through CCE app.
36.4.13 Crop Insurance App:
Crop Insurance App is mobile based app developed for the farmers. Through this
app, farmers can enroll themselves directly and can track the status of their
application and the status of the claims. The app will be also enabled for Crop Loss
Intimation and Crop Change Intimation.
36.4.14 Claim module and its alignment with PFMS module:
Claim module is to be developed under NCIP with functionality for claim
calculation, claim approval/rejection etc. State will be facilitated to upload the IU
and crop wise AY and TY season wise. Provisions for following Claims Type will be
made:
a. CCE based widespread Calamities
b. Mid-Season Adversity
c. Prevented Sowing
d. Localized Risks
e. Post-Harvest Losses
f. Weather based Claims for RWBCIS
36.4.15 Calculation of Service Charges:
It is proposed to calculate the Bank and CSC charges through NCIP on the basis of
the number of applications and to automatically transfer the service charges to the
respective channel through the NCIP interface. In cases, where the farmer's
premium is borne by the Government, the service charges shall be calculated on
the actual farmer premium irrespective of the amount deducted/paid.
www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY 116

www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY
Bank and CSC service charges will be calculated on NCIP as per the approved
application. It will be calculated at the end of the season to minimize the variation.
Auto calculated service charges will be available in insurance company login for
approval. The approved, commission will be paid to the Bank and CSC through the
third party payment gateway.
36.4.16 Seasonality Discipline:
Scheme PMFBY/RWBCIS are driven by seasonality discipline and accordingly the
provisions under the portal for different users shall be automated as per the dates
notiﬁed.
36.4.17 Intermediary Module:
Intermediaries are the representatives of empanelled ICs and responsible for the
enrolment of the of the non-loanee farmers. Intermediaries web interface is
enabled for the enrolment of farmers. As of now the option is enabled for the
insurance company for which the cluster is allocated i.e. L1 insurance company as
per tender. As per the guidelines, other empanelled ICs which have participated in
the bidding and are keen for enrolment of non loanee farmers in the cluster may
also be allowed to enrol non-loanee farmers at L1 premium rate. The interested
companies have to inform their willingness in writing within seven days of
ﬁnalisation of tender/issuance of work order to L1.
Empanelled ICs which have participated in the bidding will be mapped with the
district under NCIP. The option will be available in the State user/ State admin login.
The mapped insurance company must agree/approve the mapping as per the
willingness shown to State for the coverage. This option will be available in the IC's
admin login.
Provided that, in order to ensure control over the sources of enrolment, such
companies shall carry out enrolment only through the intermediary channel. For
depositing the collected farmer premium to the insurance company account,
challan or wallet system will be implemented.
36.4.18 Email and SMS platform:
Email and SMS platform will be enhanced for sending the intimations or
acknowledgement to the stakeholders. SMS will be sent for every change in the
status of the application for the farmer. System generated mails will be sent to the
Bank, insurance company, CSC etc.
36.4.19 Amount based notiﬁcation and differential notiﬁcation:
Notiﬁcation is the base for the enrolment of application of farmers under NCIP.
Under notiﬁcation, the State declares the crop, premium rate, scale of ﬁnance and
other parameters. Currently, premium amount is calculated on the basis of the
premium rate and scale of ﬁnance deﬁned under notiﬁcation. Revised guidelines
allow State to exempt the farmer's premium but, in such cases, differential premium
will be borne by the State Government. However, in this scenario at least Rs.1 will
be taken from farmer as token money to have the record of such applications on the
Portal. Also, if the State provides the exemption for the farmer's premium for certain
limit of land area, then their will be a provision of same on Ev-NCIP.
a) Absolute amount-based farmer premium:
117

www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY
Enabling option in notiﬁcation to declare the farmer premium in absolute
amount. In such cases the State will enter the premium amount instead of
percentage. However, total amount of farmer premium will not exceed the amount
calculated in terms of percentage deﬁned in the tender notiﬁcation. Also, the State
may deﬁne that this exemption will be facilitated on the ﬁrst cum ﬁrst serve basis
upto certain limit. For example, for the ﬁrst 100 applications the farmer premium
may be Rs.1 only.
b) Limited area-based notiﬁcation:
State limits the farmer premium subsidy upto certain limit of the insured area for a
farmer. If the insured area exceeds the deﬁned limit, then farmer has to pay the full
premium for the exceeded area insured. The notiﬁcation module will be
customizable as per the State requirement based on key parameters.
36.4.20 Integration of NCIP with Crop Insurance portal of States:
Some States e.g., Karnataka have their own crop insurance portals and farmers
data is captured on their State portal. Integration of State's portal with the NCIP is
required for the ﬂow of information for centralized monitoring.
State will share the API for transferring the data from State's Portal to NCIP. The
APIs will be tested with the input parameter for the desired output. All the attributes
related to farmer, farmer enrolment, threshold yield, actual yield, claims etc. will be
shared. Any update in the records must be brought into sync with the NCIP.
36.4.21 Aadhaar Vault implementation:
Aadhaar Number and Aadhaar related information to be encrypted by a reference
key and stored in Aadhaar Vault; all protocols to be deﬁned as per UIDAI guidelines
will be followed.
36.4.22 Subsidy release framework:
Subsidy is an important part of the scheme. GoI and State Government share the
insurance premium subsidy. Subsidy release framework is to be implemented
through NCIP to keep track of the movement of subsidy from the State and Central
Government to the ICs.
Option to auto-calculate the State and Central Subsidy by the system itself as per
the OGs and on the basis of applications approved on NCIP. Insurance company
can raise the subsidy release request with the State Government through NCIP.
All the subsidy release sanction order will be entered by the State and GoI in NCIP.
Insurance Company will enter the transaction details on the NCIP.
36.4.23 Intermediary Mobile Module/Web Module:
Intermediaries are the representatives of empanelled ICs and responsible for the
enrolment of the non-loanee farmers. Development of the mobile based
application for capturing the date of farmer enrolment and premium collection.
Option will be enabled in the intermediary app to enrol the farmer's application for
the selected season and year. Enrolment will capture all the required ﬁelds and
necessary document through app and will be available on NCIP. Option to pay the
farmer premium of the enrolled application will be implemented through wallet or
challan system.
118

ANNEXURE - I
www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY
Add-on Coverage for Crop Loss due to Attack by Wild
Animals
1. Coverage for Crop Loss due to Attack by Wild Animals:
1.1 The provision for cover against losses to crops due to attack of wild animals
wherever the risk is perceived to be substantial (Indemnity level + 10% loss), is
identiﬁable and is not frequent/regular will be covered. It is intended for farmers
whose crop ﬁeld is likely to be affected by raiding/grazing or by the impact of
damage by wild animals occasionally affecting the individual isolated farms. This
cover is intended to provide protection against such incidences causing
irreversible damage to the standing and insured crop.
1.2 The deﬁnition of wild animals will be as per the categorization of the MOEF&CC/
state forest department based on historic yield losses faced. Hence, the State
government should obtain the consent of MOEF&CC/ state forest department for
notiﬁed area/IU wise notiﬁcation of Wild animals.
2. Risks Covered:
2.1 Initially this add-on cover would be available on a pilot basis. In the initial stages of
pilot, the add-on cover against losses due to wild animals would be available for
those crops only which have a history of demonstrable economic loss by attack of
wild animals. List of these wild animals will be notiﬁed by State Government,
preferably notiﬁed area/IU wise.
2.2 Notiﬁcation of the wild animals covered under add-on cover will be done in
area(s) / crop(s) to be notiﬁed under PMFBY or separately.
3. Risk Acceptance:
3.1 As substantial historic yield data is not available for the economic losses to crops by
attack of wild animals, actuarial pricing is not possible at present for this add-on
cover. However states having 10-12 years historic yield loss data to crops by wild
animals can ﬂoat a separate tender for this add-on cover to decide the actuarial
premium rate by the ICs along with the PMFBY tender, however the add-on
actuarial premium rate will be considered separately and shall not form a part of the
evaluation of L1. Further, one Insurance company will implement PMFBY and
add-on cover of loss due to attack by wild animals. L1 bidder of PMFBY will be
asked to match the add-on coverage rate of L1 bidders. In case L1 PMFBY bidder
doesn't agree to match the L1 add-on coverage rates, State may negotiate with L1
PMFBY bidder for coverage of add-on cover due to wild animals. Alternatively
State may also adopt alternative - II.
States may ensure that the actuarial premium rate quoted by the ICs should be
rational to the past loss experience. Under this provision all risks will be borne by
the concerned IC. (refer as alternative - I).
3.2 Alternatively, those states not having requisite historical yield loss data to crops
damaged by the attack of wild animals to determine the rational actuarial premium
rate can consider to implement this add-on cover on corpus model. However, there
should be some past experience of demonstrable crop losses by wild animals
(refer as alternative - II)
119

3.3 In case any farmer has beneﬁtted upto 100% of the sum insured from the add-on
cover due to attack of wild animals then the farmer will not be eligible for any claims
under PMFBY yield loss. The total liability under both cases combined would be
limited to 100% of the sum insured.
Alternative - II (Corpus Fund): In case both PMFBY yield losses and add-on
coverage losses due to wild animals are triggered then ﬁrst liability of claims will be
met through yield-based coverage and the remaining liability will be met from the
corpus fund. Payment of claims will be done based on the incidence and
occurrence of risk and the liability will be adjusted at the end of the season.
Example -
Case - I:
Sum Insured = ` 100,000,
Yield Based Claims = ` 60,000
Claims due to Add-on Coverage (Wild Animals) = `40,000
Total admissible claims to the Farmers = ` 60,000
Liability of claims on ICs = ` 60,000
Liability on Corpus Fund = Nil
Case - II:
Sum Insured = ` 100,000,
Yield Based Claims = ` 40,000
Claims due to Add-on Coverage (Wild Animals) = ` 60,000
Total admissible claims to the Farmers = ` 60,000
Liability of claims on ICs = ` 40,000
Liability on Corpus Fund = ` 20,000
Note: If the loss due to add-on cover happens mid season in Case II, corpus would
pay Rs. 60,000 ﬁrst to the farmer. As per area approach end of season yield
estimation, if loss determined is Rs. 40,000, Insurance company would pay the
corpus Rs. 40,000. (Refer 11.5 & 11.6 in Annexure I)
3.4 State Governments opting for corpus model for the implementation of this add-on
cover will create a corpus fund at the State level to provide claims to eligible farmers
over and above the premium collected. Any claims arising for this add-on cover will
be paid from the corpus fund with 100% contribution from concerned the State
Government and the State Forest Department, if they have the provision/allocation
for the same. Detailed modalities of Corpus fund and its management will be
framed by the concerned State Government in consultation with their concerned
department/Organisation well before ﬂoating the tender for greater transparency
and better understanding of the add-cover among the other stakeholders.
3.5 The IC under PMFBY for the respective season will also act as an implementing
agency for this add-on cover at deﬁned rational administrative charges notiﬁed by
the State Government at the time of the tender in consultation with the IC. The
notional premium of the farmers should at least be equivalent to the administrative
charges of the implementing IC.

3.6 This add-on cover would run concurrently and follow the cut-off dates as speciﬁes
in seasonality discipline of PMFBY. Farmers who opt for this cover will be enrolled
after payment of a notional premium notiﬁed by the state government at the time of
the notiﬁcation for both alternatives mentioned in Para 3.1 & 3.2 above.
www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY 120

3.7 As mentioned in Para 5.2.5 of these OGs of PMFBY, the ﬁnancial liability of this
cover will be borne by the concerned State Government only. However, the fund
available in other related schemes of the State Governments and assistance aid of
MOEF&CC may also be utilized for meeting the ﬁnancial liabilities of States.
3.8 State Governments may provide requisite information related to historic crop
losses by wild animals etc. to the IC and also discuss the issues in the SLCCCI
meeting.
4. Eligibility Criteria of farmers:
4.1 Available to all insured farmers to indemnify the losses at farm unit level, affected
by the above mentioned peril in a Notiﬁed IU growing notiﬁed crops for which
insurance has been availed.
4.2 The add-on cover will be optional for both the loanee and non-loanee farmers. If a
farmer opts for the cover, he will have to pay notional premium rate. However, the
concerned State Government will provide remaining premium as subsidy or
eligible claims from the corpus fund for alternative I & II respectively.
4.3 Non-loanee farmers will opt for this add-on cover at the time of enrolment and
loanee farmers will inform the concerned Bank branches to opt for this cover in
writing at least 2 working days prior to the prescribed cut-off date of enrolment/debit
of premium. Provision in this regard will be explored in NCIP if the coverage is
adequate. However, State Government and concerned ICs will maintain the
granular data of insured farmers including add-on coverage. If the L1 under
PMFBY and L1 for add-one coverage are different the L1 of the PMFBY will provide
all requisite data of farmers and support to L1 of add-on cover.
4.4 Only those farmers would be eligible for ﬁnancial support under this cover who
have paid the premium or the premium has been debited from their account.
4.5 This add-on cover will be available initially for major crops only.
4.6 The State Government would notify the list of wild animals, which inhabit the
region, IU and crop-wise which will be covered under this add-on cover in
consultation with state forest department.
4.7 The add-on cover would be applicable from 30 days after sowing to harvesting
during the crop duration. The coverage duration should compulsorily be notiﬁed in
notiﬁcation in dd.mm.yyyy format.
4.8 Indemnity would be payable only when the area affected by notiﬁed wild animals is
more than 25% of the individual insured ﬁeld/plot or 0.1 acre, whichever is lower,
and the affected notiﬁed crop has less than 25% chances of crop revival till harvest.
This provision may be reviewed by the respective implementing States.
4.9 If the pay out under area approach (based on CCEs data) is more than losses
under this add-on cover, the balance claims, if any, will be settled at the end
of season.
5. Proxy-Indicators:
5.1 Incidence of raiding/grazing by wild animal must be substantiated by media
reports/coverage in the local media or the reports of the Agriculture /
Forest / Revenue department. The State governments may also consider other
reports of damage including reports of Panchayati raj/ Gram Sabha
www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY 121

www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY
etc. as intimation and quantity of loss. However, only report of the State
Government in the matter will be considered for deciding the payouts/claims.
6. Sum Insured:
6.1 The sum insured will be same as notiﬁed under PMFBY. There would not be any
additional sum insured for this add-on cover.
7. Time and method of reporting the loss/claims:
7.1 Immediate intimation (within 72 hours) by the insured farmer to any reporting
channel as detailed in the Para 8 of Annexure I.
7.2 Intimation must contain details of survey number-wise insured crop and acreage
affected with stage of crop at the time of damage by wild animals and the chances
of regrowth of the crop.
7.3 Premium payment veriﬁcation to be done from the portal and in case of need, may
be veriﬁed from the bank and bank shall provide the payment veriﬁcation within
next 48 hours of receipt of such request.
7.4 Crop Insurance App may be used for reporting incidence of damage of notiﬁed
crops due to wild animals for intimation of events including longitude/latitude
details and pictures.
8. Channel of reporting i.e. Whom to be reported:
8.1 Intimation may be given within 72 hours by farmer either directly through "Crop
Insurance App" to the IC or through a dedicated toll-free number, Centralized
Call-Centre number of concerned IC. The intimation may also be forwarded
through the concerned bank branch, local agriculture department
Government/district ofﬁcials or through toll-free number. First mode of intimation
should be the "Crop Insurance App" and the centralised Toll-Free Number for this
purpose, followed by intimation through the Insurance Company's toll free number
or through the bank or district ofﬁcials to the IC for conducting the individual level
investigations. The concerned bank/intermediary would verify the insured details
like crop insured, sum insured, premium debited and date of debit & remittance for
conducting investigation/assessment.
8.2 Primarily reporting of losses will be done through the Crop Insurance App and
Centralised Toll-Free Number (once operationalized), along with other channels.
Other Channels will be phased out subsequently.
8.3 In case the intimation has been given through the concerned bank branch or
Government ofﬁcials, the same should compulsorily be given within the next 48
hours to concerned IC. In case the concerned farmer's details are not available on
NCIP, the concerned bank/intermediary would verify the insured details like crop
insured, sum insured, premium debited and date of debit & remittance for
conducting investigation/assessment.
9. Documentary evidence required for claim assessment:
9.1 Duly ﬁlled claim form preferably in vernacular language along with all relevant
documents is necessary for payment of the claims. However, if information on all
the columns is not readily available, semi-ﬁlled form may be sent to the IC and later
within 7 days of the loss, ﬁlled form may be submitted.
122

www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY
9.2 Evidence of crop loss through capturing pictures using mobile applications i.e.
Crop Insurance App.
9.3 Media report, local newspaper cutting to substantiate occurrence of loss event and
severity of the loss, if any.
10. Appointment of Loss Assessors by the Insurance Company:
10.1 The loss assessors would be appointed by the IC for assessment of crop losses
due to attack of wild animals. The loss assessors appointed by the IC should be in
accordance with the IRDAI provisions and should possess the following
experience and qualiﬁcation:
10.1.1 Graduate in Natural sciences, Wild life Sciences, retired ofﬁcials of forest
department and other allied sciences.
10.1.2 Diploma in any subject with minimum 2 years of relevant experience /degree in Agri
and allied subjects with one year experience.
10.1.3 Retired Government ofﬁcials of Agriculture/ Horticulture/ Extension Department
having Diploma/B.Sc. (Ag.) degree.
10.1.4 Retired Bank ofﬁcials with experience of crop loaning or Kisan Credit Card (KCC).
10.2 For compliance under the above provisions, the ICs would Utilize the empanelled
loss assessors for using their services as and when required.
10.3 The loss would be jointly assessed by a team comprising of loss assessor
appointed by the insurer, block level agriculture ofﬁcer, local forest department
ofﬁcer and the concerned farmer.
11. Time frame for loss assessment and Claims Payment:
11.1 Appointment of loss assessor within 48 hours from the receipt of information to
the ICs.
11.2 Loss assessment to be done only after lapse of minimum 7 days (for assessing the
chances of revival) and must be completed within next 20 days of the receipt of
information of loss.
11.3 Claim settlement/payment to the farmers to be completed in next 10 days (subject
to receipt of premium).
11.4 The payable claim would be in proportion to the input cost incurred up-to the
incidence of crop loss by wild animals based on the stage of crop.
11.5 Claims paid under this cover would be adjusted based on the area approach and
claims paid under other covers for the same insured ﬁeld. Maximum claims would
be subject to Sum Insured.
11.6 Any saving between add-on cover claims and admissible claim under PMFBY will
be transferred to the Corpus Fund by the implementing IC.

12. Franchise:
12.1 Claims amounting to less than Rs. 100/- per intimations will not be paid to reduce
the administrative cost towards claims settlement. The claims equal or more than
Rs. 100/- will be paid in full.
123

FORMAT FOR REPORTING OF EXCESS AREA INSURED/ ACREAGE
DISCREPANCY FOR CONSIDERATION OF APPLICATION OF AREA
CORRECTION FACTOR BY INSURANCE COMPANY
(Annexure of letter No. 11019/02/2019-CrII (FTS No. 66955) dated 23rd April, 2020)
ANNEXURE - II
www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY

All areas in Hectare
District IU

Blo
ck

Details available at Notiﬁed Insurance Unit Level or Block/Taluka Level
(If sown area not available at IU level)
Name of
lowest
unit
areas at
which
sown
area
data is
available

Total
Geographical
Area at the
lowest unit
area

Net
Cultivable/sown
area at the
lowest unit
level

Total
Insured
areas
under
all
notiﬁed
crops
at
lowest
unit
areas

Name
of
Insured
Crop#

Area sown during the
season for last three
years (at lowest
available unit of area)
under reported crop

Year 3

Year 2

Year 1

A B C D E F G H I J K L
1
Details available at Notiﬁed Insurance Unit Level or Block/Taluka Level
(If sown area not available at IU level)
Maxi-
mum
of
Last
Three
Years
Sown
Area
during
current
year (If
availabl
e) at
same
unit
level
Insured area of last two previous
seasons/years (at same level of Unit)
under the reported crop

Insured area during

current season
(at same level of Unit)
under reported crop

%
Exces
s of
Area
Insure
d
over
max
sown
areas
at
Col.
(M)
%
Exces
s of
Area
Insure
d
over
max
insure
d
areas
at
Col. Q
or T
Year 2

Year 1

Loa-
nee
Non-
Loanee Total
M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y
All areas in Hectare
Loa-
nee
Non-
Loanee Total
Loa-
nee
Non-
Loanee Total
# details of each insured crops are reported separately in separate column
124

www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY
DEDUPLICATION MEASURES / WORK DONE BY INSURANCE COMPANY
BEFORE REPORTING OF AFORESAID FORMAT AS MENTIONED IN
REVISED OPERATIONAL GUIDELINES:
Outcome: List of Activities carried out and No. of applications eliminated
I. Aadhaar Based Deduplication
II. Land Record Deduplication
III. Bank Records / Loanee Veriﬁcation / Deduplication
IV. CSC Applications Processings / Deduplication
V. Communication with Banks Branch excess insured area
VI. Irregularities / Anamalies reported to State Government and Action taken
by them
VII. View / Consent of State Government, If any
VIII. Any other activities for Deduplication
125

Illustration for classiﬁcation of risks, clubbing / clustering of risks and
Districts and determination of L1 bidder:

Method 1
Deﬁne Risk Level
i. Calculate Loss Cost for each district as per illustration given for
District 1, Notiﬁed Area 1 (NFA1) and Crop1, on the basis of immediate
past ten years of yield data:

Weighted Average Loss Cost (%) of District 1 = 785000 / 10050000 = 7.80%
ii. List the districts with their loss cost (%):
Sl. No. District Name

District Loss Cost
1 District 1 7.80%
2 District 2 8.60%
3 District 3 5.40%
4 District 4

3.20%

5 District 5

4.60%

Low
Medium
High
District Loss Cost< 1/3 percentile value
District Loss Cost>= 1/3 and < 2/3 percentile values
District Loss Cost>= 2/3 percentile value
District
Name
NFA
Name Crop Last Year
Area
Insured
(In Ha)
Sum
Insured
(Rs./ha)
Weight
(ESI) in
Rs.
Average
Loss
Cost
Expected
Claim
Amount
A B C D E F=D*E G H= F*G
District 1 NFA1 Crop1 400 10000 4000000 8% 320000
District 1 NFA1 Crop2 300 4000 1200000 10% 120000
District 1 NFA2 Crop1 200 10000 2000000 6% 120000
District 1 NFA2 Crop2 150 4000 600000 5% 30000
District 1 NFA3 Crop1 125 10000 1250000 10% 125000
District 1 NFA3 Crop2 250 4000 1000000 7% 70000
Total 10050000 785000
LC
( %)
2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 Average TY
(Kg/ha)
Yield 2877 2558 1800 2097 2503 1500 2855 2734 1200 2987 2311
0% 0% 12% 0% 0% 27% 0% 0% 41% 0% 8.00%
Year
2041
www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY
ANNEXURE- III
126

1/3 percentile value 4.87% = PERCENTILE (District Loss
Cost,1/3)
2/3 percentile value 7.01% = PERCENTILE (District Loss
Cost,2/3)
District
Name Crop Estimated Area
Insured (in Ha)
Sum Insured
(Rs./ha)
Expected Sum
Insured (in Rs.)
A B C D E = C * D
District 1 Crop1 725 10000 7250000
District 1 Crop2 700 4000 2800000
District 1 Expected Sum Insured (in Rs.) 10050000
Coverage
Level Percentile
Low District ESI < 1/3 percentile value
Medium District ESI >= 1/3 and < 2/3 percentile values
High District ESI >= 2/3 percentile value
1/3 percentile value 3500000 = PERCENTILE(District ESI, 1/3)
2/3 percentile value 8833333 = PERCENTILE(District ESI, 2/3)
1/3 percentile value 3500000 = PERCENTILE(District ESI, 1/3)
2/3 percentile value 8833333 = PERCENTILE(District ESI, 2/3)
www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY
iii. Deﬁne Coverage Level:
a) Estimation of the Area Insured (in ha): The area insured for the ensuing
season would be based on the previous year area insured. However, as per
best judgment and concurrent situation, States may adjust estimated area
insured by +/- 10% of previous year area insured.
b) Estimated area insured as per (a) above for current season-year will be
multiplied with sum insured (Rs./ha) to arrive the Expected Sum Insured (in
Rs.) for each and every district-crop combination. The district level Expected
Sum Insured (ESI) will be the total of each district-crop combination within
the districts.
Example given for District 1:
In the similar manner calculate Expected Sum Insured (ESI) in Rs. for all the
districts.
c) Calculate1/3 and 2/3 Percentile values of Expected Sum Insured (ESI) for
entire district within State. Deﬁne Coverage Level as per following percentile
values:
127

d) Allocation of codes to different districts:
• Arrange the districts in any order.
• Write risk level and coverage level corresponding to each district.
• On the basis on above code table allot codes to each district.
• Arrange the districts in ascending order of allotted codes.
• Write ESI against each district in next column and arrange ESI in descending
order of the district within the same code.
Illustration:
For other codes, the distribution may be done to achieve balancing of ESI.
e) Make suitable minor changes in the distribution of districts to clusters for
achieving the objective of clustering.
www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY
District Name Expected Sum
Insured (inRs.) Coverage Level
District 1 10050000 High
District 2 9000000 High
District 3 8500000 Medium
District 4 1000000 Low
District 5 700000 Low
Risk Level Coverage Level Code
High Risk High Coverage 1
Medium Risk High Coverage 2
Low Risk High Coverage 3
High Risk Medium Coverage 4
Medium Risk Medium Coverage 5
Medium Risk Low Coverage 8
Low Risk Low Coverage 9
District
Name
Expected Sum
Insured (in Rs.) Risk Level Coverage Level Code
District 1 10050000 High Risk High 1
District 2 9000000 High Risk High 1
District 3 8500000 Medium Risk Medium 5
District 4 1000000 Low Risk Low 9
Cluster1 Cluster2 Cluster3
District
Name ESI (in Rs.) District
Name ESI (in Rs.) District
Name
ESI (in
Rs.)
District 1 10050000 District 2 9000000 District 3 8500000
District 5 700000 District 4 1000000
10050000 9700000 9500000
128

Applicable conditions for Clustering/Clubbing of districts:
i. Within the cluster, ICs would be required to quote the premium rates for all
district-crop combination for their bids to be evaluated.
ii. Company not quoting even for one of the total district-crop combinations
within the cluster would be disqualiﬁed from the bidding period.
iii. There would be no further negotiations with the L1 bidder to accept L1 rates of
other bidder for any district crop combination i.e. the rates quoted by the L1
bidder for different district-crop combination would be applicable within the
cluster. Bidding and negotiation conditions will be as per Central Vigilance
Commission (CVC) guidelines vide its circular nos. No.005/CRD/012 datedrd th
03 March 2007 & No.005/CRD/012 dated 20 Jan 2010.
iv. L1 bidder shall not be permitted to surrender partial clusters/districts. If any
company declines after being declared L1, the company may be barred to
implement crop insurance scheme for the coming 1 season in the concerned
State and the L2 may be given the cluster for implementing the crop insurance
scheme at L1 district-crop combination rates and soon to L3, L4 bidder as per
the consent of insurance company. Such bidders will be required to furnish
appropriate reasons for withdrawal/surrender in writing to Ministry of
Agriculture & Farmer's Welfare, Government of India within 10 days from
opening of the bids to enable further corrective measures and appropriate
administrative & legal action against defaulting bidders.
Selection of Implementing Agency:
Illustration:
L1 in Cluster1 is Company Z. Similar process would be followed other clusters.
Method 2
Agriculture output in the area/ district is inﬂuenced by the agro-climatic conditions
of that area/district. On the basis of the variation in agriculture output (crops) in
each district during the last 10 years, districts may be divided in to three categories
of low, moderate and high risks to agriculture. If variation in agriculture output in the
district during the last 10 years worked out to be plus minus<15% then district may
be categorized as low risk. Similarly, districts of variation ranging plus minus
16-30% may be categorized of moderate risks and variation of plus minus >30% as
high risks districts to agriculture operations. Accordingly, all districts of the State
would be identiﬁed as low/moderate/high risk. Number of clusters to be formed
shall be decided according to total no. of districts in the State. Total no. of each
category of low, moderate and high risks districts shall be divided by no. of clusters
to be formed in the State. Then, equal no. of low risk districts shall be selected
randomly for each cluster of districts. Similarly, moderate and high risks districts
would be selected.
Weighted Premium Rate (%) for companies
Company X Company Y Company Z
0.044289 0.046435 0.044221
4.43% 4.64% 4.42%
www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY 129

Cluster
Formation of clusters
No. of low
risks
districts
No. of
moderate
risks districts
No. of high
risks
districts
Total
districts in
cluster
C 1 10 5 4 19
C 2 10 5 4 19
C 3 10 5 4 19
C 4 10 5 3 18
Crops
Notiﬁed in a
District of the
Cluster
Expected
Area to be
insured (in
ha)
Notiﬁed
SI per ha
(Rs.)
Total SI
(Rs.
Lakh)
Premium
Quoted
by
company
Premium
Amount
(Rs.
Lakh)
X(% of
SI)
Paddy 10000 30000 3000 5 150
Maize 6000 20000 1200 10 120
Cotton 8000 35000 2800 12 336
Arhar 9000 50000 4500 15 675
Groundnut 5000 40000 2000 13 260
Above all
crops 38000 13500 1541
www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY
Example:
State- UP, No. of districts - 75
Based on the last 10 years variation in output, category-wise No. of districts
identiﬁed:
Low risks 40, Moderate risks 20, High risks 15,
No. of clusters (of preferably 15-20 districts each) to be formed: 75/19 =3.95 say 4
Then, no. of low risks districts in each cluster: 40/4 = 10
Similarly, moderate risks districts: 20/4=5 and high risks districts:15/4=3.75 say
4 as such
Sample calculation to ﬁnd L1:
Table - 1: Calculation to arrive company's weighted average premium in a district of
the cluster

District: D1 Company -Y
130

Crops
Notiﬁed in a
District of the
Cluster
Expected
Area to be
insured (in
ha)
Notiﬁed
SI per ha
(Rs.)
Total SI
(Rs.Lakh)
Premium
Quoted
by
company
Z (% of
SI)
Premium
Amount
(Rs.
Lakh)
Paddy 10000 30000 3000 7 210
Maize 6000 20000 1200 9 108
Cotton 8000 35000 2800 11 308
Arhar 9000 50000 4500 15 675
Groundnut 5000 40000 2000 14 280
Above all
crops 38000 13500 1581
Districts of the
Cluster
Expected
Area to be
insured (in
ha)
Total SI
(Rs. Lakh)
Premium
Amount
(Rs. Lakh)
Weighted average
Premium of
company X (% of
SI)
District D1 38000 13500 1541
District D2 40000 14000 1600
District D3 35000 13000 1400
District D4 45000 15000 1650
District D5 30000 12750 1350
Above all
Districts 188000 68250 7541
11.05
Districts of
the Cluster
Expected
Area to be
insured (in
ha)
Total SI
(Rs. Lakh)
Premium
Amount
(Rs. Lakh)
Weighted
average
Premium of
company Y (%
of SI)
District D1 38000 13500 1446
District D2 40000 14000 1500
District D3 35000 13000 1425
District D4 45000 15000 1675
District D5 30000 12750 1400
Above all
Districts 188000 68250 7446
10.91
www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY
District: D1 Company –Z
Table - 2: Calculation to arrive at company's weighted average premium in a
cluster of districts
F or Company: X
For Company: Y
131

Districts of the
Cluster
Expected
Area to be
insured (in
ha)
Total SI
(Rs. Lakh)
Premium
Amount
(Rs.
Lakh)
Weighted
average
Premium of
company Z (% of
SI)
District D1 38000 13500 1581
District D2 40000 14000 1550
District D3 35000 13000 1475
District D4 45000 15000 1600
District D5 30000 12750 1275
Above all Districts 188000 68250 7481
10.96
www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY
For Company: Z
The company of the lowest weighted average premium in the cluster will be
selected as L1. Hence, company Y qualiﬁes for L1 in the cluster of 5 districts and
like-wise for other clusters and companies.
132

Penalty and Performance Monitoring/Evaluation of Empanelled ICs:
State Level Performance Indicators
(More points indicate more penalty/negative rating)
S.
No.
Topic Pre-condition/
Remarks
Remarks on
Monitoring
Method
Remarks on Points
Criteria
Rationale
Key Penalty/Performance Indicators
1 Withdrawal
of Bids
after being
L1.
State follows
the OGs for
calling for bids
and selection of
Insurance
Company. Post
tendering, no
additional
terms/clauses
allowed.
Announcement
of L1 bidder
within 3 working
days of
schedule
opening date of
bids and
provisional work
order given
within 3 weeks.
Selected L1
bidder
withdraws its
bid after the
announcement
of L1 bidder is
made and/or
provisional work
order is
released.
If bids are withdrawn by
the Insurance Company:
a) 1 cluster/State: 5
Points.
b) > 1 cluster/State: 15
Points.
Additionally, ﬁnancial
losses, if any, to the State
Government, in
re-tendering due to
withdrawal of selected
bidders and additional
premium subsidy due to
increase in actuarial
premium rates from
previously declared L1
rates, will be recovered
from withdrawing L1
bidder.
2 This would be
applicable for
location where
Insurance
Company is
implementing
the scheme.
All
grievances/com
plaints received
through all
modes should
be disposed off
within 7 days
from receipt.
Insurance
Company to
appoint and
designate
resources as
Grievance
Redressal
Ofﬁcers (GROs)
at Sub-district
level within 30
days and at
District, State
and National
i) % of
grievances/complaints
remain unresolved at the
end of 7 days:
Ÿ between 5% -10 %: 1
Point.
Ÿ between 25 % - 50 %:
5 Points.
Ÿ > 50 %: 10 Points.
Ÿ > 75 %: 15 Points.
ii) Designation of GRO -
a) If GRO at all levels not
designated within 30 days:
10 Points.
b) If contact details GRO
not published/uploaded on
NCIP within one week
www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY
Annexure-IV
Grievance
Redressal
Mechanism.
Effective
grievance
redressal
mechanism
for faster
resolutions
and
disposal of
grievances
of farmers
and other
stakeholders.
133
With a
view to
ensure
well
worked out
rational
rating
practice
and
professional
handling of
bids.

S.
No.
Topic Pre-condition/
Remarks
Remarks on
Monitoring
Method
Remarks on Points
Criteria
Rationale
within 15 days
days from date
of Notiﬁcation of
award and list
with Name,
email ID and
Phone number
of such ofﬁcer to
be uploaded on
NCIP
simultaneously.
of designation of such
ofﬁcer: 5 Points.
c) If district
representative/GROs not
placed within 6 months:
20 points.
3 Settlement
of Claims
within 21
Days.
This would be
applicable for
location-crop
combination
where yield
data is
undisputed and
received within
notiﬁed and
speciﬁc cut-off
date.
Any dispute in
yield data
should
compulsorily be
intimated in
proper format
indicating IU-
Crop wise
details along
with valid
reasons to
concerned
State Govt
within 7 days of
receipt of yield
data from State
Govt and/or
publishing on
NCIP,
whichever is
earlier.
Otherwise, the
yield data
would be
treated as
“undisputed”.
All eligible
undisputed
claims should be
released within
21 days from the
data of AY
uploaded on the
GoI Portal
subject to receipt
of applicable
premium subsidy
as per Section
13 of these
Operational
Guidelines.
% of the undisputed
claims remain unpaid at
the end of 21 days:
Ÿ between 5% -10%: 1
Point.
Ÿ between 25 % - 50 %:
5 Points.
Ÿ > 50 %: 10 Points.
Ÿ > 75 %: 15 Points.
Penal interest @ 12% per
annum will be recovered
on admissible pending
claims amount, if ICs keep
claims pending beyond 30
days after uploading of AY
on Portal and releasing all
admissible subsidy for the
crop(s) of district, without
any genuine reason(s)
acceptable to the
Government.
Swift and
timely
settlement
of claims.
www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY 134

S.
No.
Topic Pre-condition/
Remarks
Remarks on
Monitoring
Method
Remarks on Points
Criteria
Rationale
4 This clause
would be
applicable only
if State
Government
provides the
required
support during
surveying by
District Level
Joint
Committee
(DLJC).
Any dispute in
crop loss
survey data
should
compulsorily be
intimated in
proper format
along with valid
reasons to
concerned
State
Government
within 7 days of
conduct of
survey.
Otherwise, the
crop loss
survey data
would be
treated as
“undisputed”.
As per time-line
for claim
disbursement
under this cover
as per OG.
% of the undisputed
claims remain unpaid at
the end of completion of
given timelines for each
add-on cover:
Ÿ between 5% -10 %: 1
Point.
Ÿ between 25 % - 50 %:
5 Points.
Ÿ > 50 %: 10 Points.
Ÿ > 75 %: 15 Points.
Penal interest @ 12% per
annum will be recovered
on admissible pending
claims amount, if ICs keep
claims pending beyond
allowed timelines even
after release of
admissible subsidy for the
crop(s) of district, without
any genuine reason(s)
acceptable to the
Government.
Swift and
timely
settlement
of claims
of add-on
covers.
5 District/
Sub-
District
Ofﬁce and
Human
Resources.

a) To be
appointed within
1 month in case
of functional
district ofﬁce and
15 days in case
of district level
representative
from the date of
notiﬁcation.
b) Opening of
sub-district level
ofﬁces with
requisite
infrastructure
and manpower.
The details of
ofﬁces and
1) District Ofﬁce
a) If functional district
ofﬁce not set up within 30
days: 5 Points.
b) If functional district
ofﬁce not set up within 6
months: 15 Points.
2) District Representative
a) If district representative.
not placed within 15 days:
5 Points.
b) If district
representative not placed
within 6 months: 10
Points..
www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY 135
To facilitate
development
of adequate
infrastructure
by ICs
thereby
improving
service
delivery
and
account-
ability.
Add-on
Coverage
Claim
Settlement.

S.
No.
Topic Pre-condition/
Remarks
Remarks on
Monitoring
Method
Remarks on Points
Criteria
Rationale
human
resources
deployed at each
sub-district and
district should be
uploaded within
three weeks of
award of work or
at least two
months before
the cut of date of
enrolment,
whichever is
later.
3) Sub-District level ofﬁce:
a) Sub-district level ofﬁces
not setup within timelines:
5 points.
b) Sub-district level ofﬁce
not setup within 6 months:
15 points.
Other Performance Indicators:
6 It should not
be compulsory
for ICs to
participate in
one or more
clusters in the
State.

Non-serious
participation if:
a) Deviation of
rate quoted by
Insurance
Company from
the L1 rates is.
a) If non-serious
participation in >25 %
clusters and upto 50% of
clusters: 5 Points.
b) If non-serious
participation in >50 % of
clusters: 10 Points.
Deviati
on
<5% >75%
>=5%
to 10%
> 10% > 50%
www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY
Non-
serious
participation.
136
Non-
serious
participation
has been
deﬁned
with a view
to
encourage
competitive
bidding by
ICs.
Average
Rate
> 75%

S.
No.
Topic Pre-condition/
Remarks
Remarks on
Monitoring
Method
Remarks on Points
Criteria
Rationale
7 If the
notiﬁcation is
delayed and
cut-off date is
less than 7
days from the
date of
notiﬁcation,
then this clause
will not be
applicable.
Brochures/Pamp
hlets/Leaﬂets,
etc. pertaining to
crop insurance
schemes not be
less than half of
the number of
farmers covered
during the
previous similar
(Kharif/Rabi)
season in the
district.
Payment to
vendor would be
the deciding
criteria.
If printing is less than:
a) 50%: 2 Points.
b) 25%: 5 Points.
8 Training,
workshop,
etc.
If the
notiﬁcation is
delayed and
cut-off date is
less than 15
days from the
date of
notiﬁcation,
then this clause
will not be
applicable.
Organization of
at least one
banker's
sensitization
programme and
not less than 5
farmers
awareness Block
level/Panchayat
level
programmes in
each district
during the
season.
a) If banker's sensitization
programme not conducted: 10 Points.
b) Farmers awareness
programme:
< 2: 5 Points.
<5: 2 Points.
To help
sensitize
bankers
and the
farmers.
9 This clause
would be
applicable only
if State
Government
provides CCE
schedules
timely to the
ofﬁcer
nominated by
ICs in District
Level Steering
Committee.
Co-observance
of CCEs
scheduled by the
concerned
department in
the district.
Co-observance between
20% to 30% of total CCEs
conducted in allotted
Districts: 10 Points
Less than 20%: 15
Points.
CCE
witnessing
is in the
interest of
the
Insurance
Company,
therefore
Insurance
Company
will take
suitable
steps to
witness
maximum
number of
CCEs
wherever
required.
www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY
CCE
Co-
observance.
137
Preparation
of
brochures,
etc.
Number
of farmers
insured in
previous is
available,
hence
number of
pamphlets/
leaﬂets,
etc. is
pre-decided.

S.
No.
Topic Pre-condition/
Remarks
Remarks on
Monitoring
Method
Remarks on Points
Criteria
Rationale
10 Requisite to
process the
application
before seeking
premium
subsidy from
the
Government
This process is
mandatory and
has to be
conducted
using CCE
app/crop
survey app and
will be used for
veriﬁcation
purposes.
To ﬁnish the
veriﬁcation of
applicant fulﬁlling
the eligibility
criteria within
stipulated
timelines.
Mandatorily Conduct 20
survey for each notiﬁed
crop in a district.
If achieve
100 % of the Target – 0
points.
Upto 75% - 5 points.
Upto 50% - 10 points.
Crop
survey at
the ﬁeld
level helps
in
veriﬁcation
of actual
crop
grown on
the
ground.
11 If farmer
applications are
auto-approved
by GoI on NCIP
due to delay by
ICs in
processing
applications.
Percentage of
farmer
applications auto
approved on
National Crop
Insurance Portal
(NCIP).
No applications auto
approved – NIL
Less than 20%
applications auto
approved – 5 points.
>=20% and <=40%
applications auto
approved – 10 points.
>40% applications auto
approved – 15 points.
Performance severity of Insurance Company at State Level:
Threshold limit Severity
0 - 20 Points Insurance Company nominated for Annual National Award.
21 - 40 points Insurance Company nominated for Technical/RST Pilot Project
through Technology Fund.
41 - 50 points Deduction of 0.5% of total Premium amount for the concerned
Insurance Company for a Year (Kharif & Rabi seasons).
51 – 60 points Deduction of 1% of total Premium amount for the concerned
Insurance Company for a Year (Kharif & Rabi seasons).
61 - 70 points Deduction of 1.5% of total Premium amount for the concerned
Insurance Company for a Year (Kharif & Rabi seasons).
71 - 80 points Deduction of 2% of total Premium amount for the concerned
Insurance Company for a Year (Kharif & Rabi seasons).
81 - 90 points Deduction of 3% of total premium for a Year (Kharif & Rabi seasons)
- cancellation of renewal/continuation for next season.
www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY 138
Crop
Survey and
De-
Deduplication
Exercise to
eliminate
duplicate/
bogus
application.
Auto-
approval
of
applications
on NCIP.
To ensure
timely
processing
of farmer
applications
by ICs.

Threshold limit Severity
> 90 points.
Deduction of 5% of total premium for a Year (Kharif & Rabi seasons)
- cancellation of renewal/continuation of extant business subject to
provisions under Para 7.1.14 of these guidelines and blacklisting of
Insurance Company for 1 year in the State.
False intimations on
any of the above
parameters.
Investigations to be called against the insurance company and if it is
found that company has falsiﬁed data - cancellation of
renewal/continuation of extant business subject to provisions under
Para 7.1.14 of these guidelines and dis-empanelment of Insurance
Company for 2 years.
*Note: All fund collection due to imposition of penalty would go to Technology Fund except penalty
due to delay in release of claim by ICs which shall be passed on to the concerned beneﬁciary
farmers. The penalty amount shall be deposited by the concerned ICs within one month of
publication of Ranking by GoI.
National Level Performance Indicators:
(More points indicate more penalty/negative rating)
S.
No.
Topic Pre-condition/
Remarks
Remarks on
Monitoring
Method
Remarks on Points
Criteria
Rationale
1 States in which
Insurance
Company has
participated.
i) Non-Participation in
States -
a) If participated in <35%
of States: 5 Points.
b) If participated in <20%
of States: 10 Points.
ii) If IC has not
participated in at least 4
North Eastern States, 2
Hilly States and 2 Union
Territories: 10 points.
2 Enrolment
of non-
loanee
farmers.
1) At least 30
days marketing
window should
be available to
ICs post
notiﬁcation.
Applicable If
number of
farmers enrolled
during the
season is
decreased over
similar season
during previous
year. The
comparison
would be made
for same district
coverage during
previous year,
even if the
district was
allotted to other
company.
If company-wise at all
India level coverage of
Non-Loanee farmers
decreases by:
(a) 10 – 25 %: 5 Points.
(b) >25%: 10 Points.
To
increase
coverage
under the
Scheme.
www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY 139
Non-
Participation
in Bidding.

Non-
participation
has been
deﬁned with
a view to
ensure
participation
in maximum
number of
States by
the
companies.

Performance severity of Insurance Company at National Level:
*Note: All fund collection due to imposition of penalty would go to Technology Fund. The penalty
amount shall be deposited by the concerned ICs within one month of publication of Ranking
by GoI.
S.
No.
Topic Pre-condition/
Remarks
Remarks on
Monitoring
Method
Remarks on Points
Criteria
Rationale
3 States with
high
penalty.
Penalty Points
received in
State
Evaluation.
%age of States where >
70 penalty points has
been awarded to IC –
a) > 25%: 20 Points
b) > 10% up to 25%: 10
points.
To ensure
effective
implement
ation and
service
delivery by
ICs.
4 State with
medium
penalty.
Penalty Points
received in
State Evaluation
If a State is
already
considered in
imposition of
penalty under
“States with
high penalty”, it
should not be
counted twice
here.
%age of States where >
50 penalty points has
been awarded to IC –
a) > 25%: 10 Points.
b) > 10% up to 25%: 5
points.
To ensure
effective
implement-
ation and
service
delivery by
ICs.
Threshold limit Severity
11 points to 20 points Equivalent to additional 0.5% of total National Premium amount for the
concerned Insurance Company for a Year (Kharif & Rabi seasons).
21 points to 30 points Equivalent to additional 1% of total National Premium amount for the
concerned Insurance Company for a Year (Kharif & Rabi seasons).
31 points to 40 points Equivalent to additional 2% of total National Premium amount for the
concerned Insurance Company for a Year (Kharif & Rabi seasons).
41 or more points Equivalent to additional 3% of total National Premium amount for the
concerned Insurance Company for a Year (Kharif & Rabi seasons),
Cancellation of all extant business of the Insurance Company subject to
provisions under Para 7.1.14 of these guidelines, and dis-
empanelment for 1 year.
False intimations on
any of the above
parameters
Investigations to be called against the insurance company and if it is
found that company has falsiﬁed data - cancellation of all extant
business of the Insurance Company subject to provisions under Para
7.1.14 of these guidelines and dis-empanelment for 2 years.
www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY 140

Annexure-V
Illustrative Evaluation of Efﬁciency of Nodal Department of the State:
S.
No.
Service Level
Agreement's
(SLA's)
Source of
Data
Monitoring
Method
Periodicity Points Criteria
Key Performance Indicators
1 The
available
information
on the
National
Crop
Insurance
Portal.
Date of Tender
Document
release and the
onset of
respective crop
season.
For each
tender.
Tender result on Portal
within stipulated
timelines: 5 points.
2 The
available
information
on the
National
Crop
Insurance
Portal.
Date of
Notiﬁcation
release and the
onset of
respective crop
season.
For each
season
and
scheme
separately.
1. Release of
Notiﬁcation/GO as per
timelines: 5 points.
2. Release of
Notiﬁcation/GO
after timelines but
before
commencement of
season: 3 points.
3. Release of
Notiﬁcation/GO after
commencement of
season: 0 point.
4. Release of
Notiﬁcation/GO after
commencement of the
season but within 60
days of enrolment cut
off date: (-2) points.
5. Release of
Notiﬁcation/GO after
commencement of the
season but within 15
days of enrolment cut
off date: (-5) points.
www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY 141
Release of
Tender at least
3 months
before the
commencement
of the season.
Tender results
should be
displayed and
uploaded on
national Portal.
Release of
Physical
Notiﬁcation/
GO by the
State at least 2
months before
the
commencement
of the season.

S.
No.
Service Level
Agreement's
(SLA's)
Source of
Data
Monitoring
Method
Periodicity Points Criteria
3 The
available
information
on the
National
Crop
Insurance
Portal.
Date of complete
Digitization of
Notiﬁcation.
For each
season
and
scheme
separately.
1. Release of digital
notiﬁcation within
timelines: 10 points.
2. Release of digital
notiﬁcation before
commencement of
season: 5 points.
3. Release of digital
notiﬁcation after
commencement of
season: (-2) points for
each fortnightly delay.
4 The
available
information
on the
National
Crop
Insurance
Portal.
IU Level Each
season.
1. If >75% Insurance
Unit in a state notiﬁed
at village/GP level: 5
points
2. If < 75% Insurance
Unit in a state notiﬁed
at village/GP level: 0
point.
5 Notiﬁcation of
Maximum
Gross
Cropped Area.
The
available
information
on the
National
Crop
Insurance
Portal.
Total hectares
insured.
Both
seasons
together.
1. Gross Cropped Area
(GCA) Notiﬁed under
Crop Insurance >40%: 15 Points.
2. GCA Notiﬁed under
Crop Insurance
between 30 to 40%:
10 Points.
3. GCA Notiﬁed under
Crop Insurance GCA
<20%: (-5) Points.
6 Payment of
State share of
Premium
Subsidy to
Insurance
Company (As
prescribed in
Operational
Guidelines).
Computed
from the data
available on
the National
Crop
Insurance
Company
Portal/to
State
Government.
Premium
Requisition
(PR) raised
by the
concerned
Insurance
Company
on National
Crop
Insurance
Portal/to
State
Government.
The premium
requisition made
on basis of
Portal data and
the payment
actually made by
the State.
Based on
the
requests
made for
each
season
and
scheme.
1. Release of premium
within timelines: 10
points.
2. Release of premium
after timelines: 0
point.
www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY 142
Digital
notiﬁcation on
the National
Crop Insurance
Portal at least
30 days from
the
commencement
of season.
Level of
Notiﬁcation
(Village/GP/
Mandal/District)

S.
No.
Service Level
Agreement's
(SLA's)
Source of
Data
Monitoring
Method
Periodicity Points Criteria
7 Initiatives and
monitoring
taken for
increasing
enrolment of
loanee
farmers.
List of
insured
farmers on
the crop
insurance
Portal.
Increase in
number of
enrolled loanee
farmers over
same season of
the previous
year.
Based on
the
enrolments
made for
each
season.
1. > 10% Increase in
overall enrolment: 5
points.
2. 5-10% Increase in
overall enrolment: 2
points.
3. <5% or no Increase in
overall enrolments: 0
point.
4. Decrease in overall
enrolments: (-5)
points.
8 Initiatives
taken for
increasing
enrolment of
non-loanee
farmers.
List of non-
loanee
insured
farmers on
the crop
insurance
Portal.
a) Share of non
loanee famers in
total enrolment.
Each
season.
1. If % NL farmers
insured w.r.t total
farmers insured is
>25%: 10 points.
2. If % NL farmers
insured w.r.t total
farmers insured is
between 10-25%: 5
points.
3. If % NL farmers
insured w.r.t total
farmers insured is
<10%: 0 point.
b) Increase in
number of
enrolled non-
loanee farmers
over same
season of
previous year.
1. % Increase over
previous season
>10%: 5 points.
2. % Increase over
previous season
between 5-10%: 2.5
points.
3. % decrease over
previous season:
(-5) points.
9 Reporting of
CCEs through
mobile/ CCE
App.
The
available
information
on the
National
Crop
Insurance
Portal.
Total CCEs
reported through
Mobile/CCE App
out of gross no.
of CCEs
planned.
For each
season.
1. Reporting of > 90%
CCEs through Mobile
App: 15 points.
2. Reporting of between
75% to 90% CCEs
through Mobile App:
10 points.
3. Reporting of between
50% to 74% CCEs
through Mobile App:
5 points.
4. Reporting of <25%
CCEs through Mobile
App: (-10) points
5. No reporting of CCEs
through Mobile App:
(-15) points.
www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY 143

S.
No.
Service Level
Agreement's
(SLA's)
Source of
Data
Monitoring
Method
Periodicity Points Criteria
10 Uploading of
TY, AY,
Historical Yield
data, on
Portal.
The
available
information
on the
National
Crop
Insurance
Portal.
For each
season.
1. Uploading of > 90% of
data within timelines:
15 Points.
2. Uploading of between
50% to 90% of data
within timelines: 10
Points.
3. Uploading of between
25% to 49% of data
within timelines: 5
Points.
4. No data uploaded on
Portal within timelines: 0 Point.
Other Parameters
11 Setting up of
State
Technical
Support Unit.
Report from
the State
Government
Within 12
months from
release of
Operational
Guidelines.
12 Setting up of
DGRC and
SGRC for
settlement of
Grievances.
Notiﬁcation
issued
regarding
formation of
DGRC and
SGRC.
Within 60 days
after publishing
of Operational
Guidelines.
1. Setting of DGRC &
SGRC as per
timelines: 5 points.
2. Setting of DGRC &
SGRC after the
timelines: 0 point.
13 Printed
brochures/
pamphlets/
posters with
a report
from State
Government
Pamphlets/
leaﬂets to be
distributed
through all
channels.
1. Awareness and
extension activities as
per timelines: 5
points.
2. No Awareness and
extension activities or
after the timelines: 0
point.
14 Folio
Distribution by
the Banks to
Farmers.. Report by State
Department to
MoA&FW
uploaded on
Portal.
Within 60
days after
premium
cut-off date
for each
season.
1. Folio distribution to >
90% farmers: 5 points
2. Folio distribution to
between 75% to 90%
farmers: 3 points.
3. Folio distribution to
between < 75%: 0
point.
4. No distribution of
Folios: (-5) points.
www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY
Based on
the details
of DGRC/
SGRC
constituted
and
uploaded
on the
Portal.
144
1. Setting up of STSU
within timelines: 5
points.
2. Non-setting up of
STSU or after the
timelines: 0 point.
Preparation of
brochures/
pamphlets/
posters/banners/
to be used for
publicity.
30 days before
the
commencement
of enrolment.
Each
season
separately
Based on
information
furnished/
uploaded on
Portal by
State
Government
Report from
the National
Crop
Insurance
Portal and
from State
Government/
SLBC

S.
No.
Service Level
Agreement's
(SLA's)
Source of
Data
Monitoring
Method
Periodicity Points Criteria
15 Report from
State
Department.
Report by State
Department to
MoA&FW within
7 days of no
workshop and
information
upload on Portal.
At least 60
days from
premium
cut-off date
and
Harvesting
period
each
season.
1. Organizing Workshops
as per timelines: 10
points.
2. Organizing Workshops
after the timelines: 5
points.
3. No workshop
organized: 0 point.

16 Setting up of
District Level
Monitoring
Committees in
each notiﬁed
District and
fortnightly
review.
The
available
information
of
committees
on the
National
Crop
Insurance
Portal.
Date of
formation of
DLMC and data
of review
meetings shared
on Portal.
1. Setting up of DLMC as
per timelines:
10 points.
2. Setting up of DLMC
after the timelines: 5
points.
3. Not Setting up of
DLMC as per
timelines: 0 point.
17 Constituting
District Level
Joint
Committee
(DLJC) in each
notiﬁed
District.
The
available
information
of
committees
on the
National
Crop
Insurance
Portal.
Date of
formation of
committee
shared on Portal.
Upon
commence
ment of
each
season.
1. Setting up of DLJC as
per timelines: 10
points.
2. Setting up of DLJC
after the timelines: 5
points.
3. Not Setting up of
DLJC: 0 point.
18 Sharing of
CCE Schedule
with Insurance
Company.
The
available
information
on the
National
Crop
Insurance
Portal.
Sharing of
information as
per the timelines
as prescribed in
OGs.
For each
season.
1. Sharing of CCE
schedule for > 85%
Notiﬁed IU Level as
per timelines: 5
points.
2. Sharing of CCE
schedule after
timelines: 0 point.
www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY
• Banks, CSCs
and
Departmental
workers.
• For Crop
Cutting
Experiments.
145
Organizing
State level
training/capacity
building
workshops as
per the
guidelines for
Districts
Ofﬁcials for:
Upon
commen-
cement
of each
season.

S.
No.
Service Level
Agreement's
(SLA's)
Source of
Data
Monitoring
Method
Periodicity Points Criteria
19 Timely
approval and
sharing of
CCE data with
stakeholders.
Within 30 days
from ﬁnal
harvest.
For each
season.
1. Approval and sharing
of CCE data within
prescribed timelines:
5 points.
2. Approval and sharing
of CCE data after
timelines: 0 point.
3. Approval and sharing
of CCE data after 2
months of prescribed
timelines: (-5 points).
20 Mapping of
villages and
upper
Revenue/
Administrative
hierarchy with
Census Codes
and mapping
of AWS/Back
up AWS with
village census
codes.
The
available
information
on the
National
Crop
Insurance
Portal.
Total
villages/AWS/
Backup AWS
actually mapped
against gross no
of villages.
Before
commenc-
ement of
the
season.
1. Completion of 100%
mapping before
digitization of
Notiﬁcation within
timelines: 5 points.
2. Request for any
change/updation after
digitization of
Notiﬁcation: 0 point.
21 Use of new
technology,
RST, NDVI
and smart
sampling for
crop health
monitoring,
loss
assessment
and dispute/
grievance
redressal at
State Level.
Use of
Technology vs
conventional
modes
employed.
For each
season.
1. Use of Technology:
10 points.
www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY
The
available
information
on the
National
Crop
Insurance
Portal and
report by the
State
Government.
146
The
available
information
on the
National
Crop
Insurance
Portal.

Threshold limit Severity
Non-Payment of
State Share of
Premium Subsidy
1% additional Interest per month after 3 months from date of
premium requisition by Insurance Company.
>300 points Nomination for National Award on PMFBY Implementation.
>200-300 points No central ﬁnancial assistance for technology upgradation to States.
<100-200 points States categorised as non-serious States (Non performers).
<100 points No Central subsidy assistance to States on Premium.
Performance Severity of States:

*Note: Provisional ranking of State shall be released on seasonal basis. However, ﬁnal ranking will be
released on yearly basis and incentives/disincentives shall be applied on the basis of ﬁnal ranking.
*Note: The total score for both seasons and the score obtained in annual criteria shall be considered
for determining the performance as per the table above.
www.pmfby.gov.in
Revamped Operational Guidelines of PMFBY 147

Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare
Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare
Government of India
Krishi Bhawan, New Delhi-110001
www.pmfby.gov.in
th
(File Number - 13015/03/2018-Credit II, Published on 17 August 2020)