eg aay
राज्य सहकारी निवडणूक प्राधिकरण,महाराष्ट्र राज्य, पुणे.
जुनी मध्यवर्ती इमारत, ५, बी. जे. रोड, पुणे. ४११००१
फोन नं.(०२०) २६०५०६४९, २६०५१११०, २९७०६ ४२११
ई-मेल आयडी:- sceapune@gmail.com

-निविदा
जाहिरात ae क्रमांक: ३७०७/२०२५
लिपीक नि टंकलेखकाची कामे करणे करिता बाह्यस्त्रोताव्दारे मनुष्यबळ पुरविणा-या यंत्रणेची
नियुक्‍ती करण्यासाठी ई-निविदा
राज्य सहकारी निवडणुक प्राधिकरण, महाराष्ट्र राज्य पुणे, या कार्यालयात कामकाजासाठी लिपीक नि टंकलेखकाची
कामे बाह्यस्त्रोताव्दारे (एजन्सी /संस्था/सहकारी संस्था इ.व्दारे) करणेकरिता मनुष्यबळ पुरविणा-या यंत्रणेची नियुक्‍ती करण्यासाठी
ई-निविदा मागविण्यात येत आहेत.
कामाचा प्रकार:- ०६ लिपीक नि टंकलेखक व ०३ शिपाई ची कामे (९ कर्मचारी सेवा उपलब्ध करुन देणे)
निविदा वेळापत्रक:-
१) ई-निविदा दाखल करण्याचा कालावधी:- दिनांक २३-०७-२०२५ (सकाळी ११.०० वा.) ते दिनांक ०७-०८-२०२५
(सायंकाळी ५.०० वाजेपर्यंत)
२) ई-निविदा दाखल करण्याचा अंतिम दिनांक:- दिनांक ०७-०८-२०२५
| 3) ई-निविदा उघडण्याचा दिनांक:- दिनांक ११-०८-२०२५ दुपारी १२.३० वाजता
इच्छुक एजन्सी/संस्था/सहकारी संस्था इ. यांचेसाठी माहिती व सविस्तर टेंडर, अर्जांचा नमुना आवश्यक कागदपत्रे,

व शर्ती इ. महाराष्ट्र शासनाचे संकेतस्थळ www.maharashtra.gov.in व https://mahatenders.gov.in, मा.सहकार

आयुक्त व निबंधक, सहकारी संस्था, महाराष्ट्र राज्य पुणे यांचे संकेतस्थळ www.sahakarayuakta.com व राज्य सहकारी

निवडणूक प्राधिकरण, महाराष्ट्र राज्य, पुणे यांचे संकेतस्थळ https://scea.maharashtra.gov.in यावरती उपलब्ध करुन
देण्यात आलेल्या आहेत.

सही/-
सचिव
राज्य सहकारी निवडणुक प्राधिकरण,
दिनांक - २३/०७/२०२५ महाराष्ट्र राज्य, पुणे,

राज्य सहकारी निवडणूक प्राधिकरण महाराष्ट्र राज्य,पुणे

जुनी मध्यवर्ती इमारत, तळमजला, ५ बी.जे. रोड, पुणे-४११००१
ई-निविदा सुचना

राज्य सहकारी निवडणूक प्राधिकरण, पुणे यांचे कार्यालयात ११ महिन्यांच्या कालावधीसाठी एकूण ६
कनिष्ठ लिपिक नि टंकलेखक व ०३ शिपाई अशा एकूण ०९ या पदाची कामे बाहय यंत्रणेद्वारे करुन घेणेकरिता
/सेवा उपलब्ध करुन देण्याकरिता सदर अर्जांची https://mahatenders.gov.in या वेबसाईटवर -ई-टेडरिंगने विक्री व
स्विकृती ई-टेडरिंगने होणार आहे.

अंदाजित rformance
हे अंदाजित किमत | Perform: बयाणा रक्‍कम | निविदेची
कामाचा तपशील Security
क्र रक्क्म पयाय % (EMD) किंमत
०६ लिपिक नि टंकलेखक रू
या पदाची कामे करणे 2,400/-
है... करीता बाह्ययंयंत्रणेची | MOREY] रु५१९८२/- रु.१७३२८ /- (निविदा
नियुक्‍ती करणे अर्जफौ
०३ शिपाई या पदाची कामे a
२ करणे करीता बाहय रु. ८,३०,०४९ | रु. २४९०१/- ee se
यंत्रणेची नियुक्‍ती करणे iN
)

१) ई-निविदा दाखल करण्याचा कालावधी:- दिनांक २३-०७-२०२५ ते दिनांक ०७-०८-२०२५
२) ई-निविदा दाखल करण्याचा अंतिम दिनांक:- दिनांक ०७-०८-२०२५
३) ई-निविदा उघडण्याचा दिनांक:- दिनांक ११-०८-२०२५ दुपारी १२.३० वाजता

१. उपरोक्त अंदाजित किंमत ही संभाव्य असून कमी जास्त होण्याची शक्यता आहे. सदरची मागणी राज्य सहकारी
निवडणूक प्राधिकरण, महाराष्ट्र राज्य, पुणे यांचे कार्यालयात एकूण ६ कनिष्ठ लिपिक नि टंकलेखक व ०३ शिपाई
अशी एकूण ०९ या पदाची कामे बाहय यंत्रणेद्वारे करुन घेणेबाबत दिलेली आहे. निविदा धारकास शासकीय सेवा
कामकाज/पुरवठयाचा कामकाजाचा पुर्वानुभव असणे आवश्यक राहील. त्याबाबतचे सक्षम प्राधिका-याकडील
अनुभव प्रमाणपत्र आवश्यक राहिल.

२. कोणतेही कारण न देता ई-निविदा स्विकारण्याचा अथवा नाकारण्याचा अधिकार राज्य सहकारी निवडणूक
प्राधिकरण, महाराष्ट्र राज्य, पुणे यांचेकडे राखून ठेवण्यात आला आहे.

३. ई-निविदा फॉर्म फी व बयाणा रककम हि ऑनलाईन पेमेट गेट-वे पध्दतीने भरावयाची आहे.

४.सदर ई-निविदा दिनांक ११-०८-२०२५ दुपारी १२.३० वाजता राज्य सहकारी निवडणूक प्राधिकरण, महाराष्ट्र राज्य,
पुणे येथे उघडण्यात येतील.

Brief Summary of Inquiry
Offer should be submitted in 2 envelope system:

a) Technical Bid — Envelope No. - 1
b) Price Bid — Envelope No. - 2

Price Bid form is enclosed as Annexure -7

TENDER FOR PROVIDING MANPOWER SERVICES TO SCEA, PUNE
2.1 SCOPE OF WORK

2.1.1 The SCEA requires the cost effective services from reputed, well established
and financially sound Manpower Service Provider Company / Firm/ Agency/co
operative society (hereinafter referred to as “Agency”) to provide manpower
services for SCEA.

2.1.2 The SCEA has initial requirement for manpower as detailed in Section 2.2
“REQUIREMENTS FOR MANPOWER TO BE DEPLOYED” which may increase or
decrease depending upon the requirement during the contract period.

2.1.3 The contract will be initially for a period of Eleven months, which may be extended
for a further period of Eleven months or thereafter depending upon the
manpower requirement and administrative convenience of SCEA. SCEA, however,
reserves the right to terminate / curtail the contract at any time after giving one
months’ notice to the qualified Agency owing to deficiency of services, sub-
standard quality of manpower deployed or for breach of contract condition or
non-availability of projects from funding agency, or any other reason deemed fit.

2.2. REQUIREMENTS FOR MANPOWER TO BE DEPLOYED

The generic and specialized qualifications and work experience for personnel as
required by SCEA from time to time is given below. However, exact
qualifications may also be prescribed while placing requirement of actual
positions from time to time. The number of personnel required, at each level is
also indicated below. This is the initial requirement; the number may vary as
per exigencies.

Tentative
requirement
of personnel

Qualifications*

CeCe बनकर सरगना eee |
Qualification: Candidates possess Graduate
degree from Recognized Universit

Clerk cum Typist | requirement: 1. Knowledge of Marathi and English

2.Typing on computer (specially Microsoft excel) is
essential.
3.MS-CIT Course completion certificate.

4. Typing certificate Marathi 30 WPM Eng 40 WPM
5.Employment office Registration must as a

raduate candidate
=: 19 to 38 years (5 year relaxation if working nder
ovt) as on 1-1-2021

Qualification: Minimum 07 th
pass
Peon Other requirement: 1. Knowledge of 3
Marathi and English
Age: 19 to 38 years (5 year relaxation
if working nder govt) as on 1-1-2021

3

GENERAL INSTRUCTIONS

3.1 The Earnest Money Deposit (EMD) Rs.25628/- (Rupees Twenty Five Thousand six

3.2:

33

3.4

3:5

3.6

3.7

3.8

3.9

Hunderad twenty eight only) refundable without interest should be submitted
by online and scanned copy of Challan should be uploaded with Technical Bid.
Failing which the tender shall be rejected summarily.

The successful bidder will have to deposit Performance Security Deposit of 3% of
accepted tender cost, in the form of Demand draft OR Bank guarantee issued by
a nationalized Bank in favour of Joint co operative election commissioner State
co operative election Authority

Conditional bids shall not be considered and will be rejected outright in very first
instance.

All original documents may be scanned and uploaded in Technical Bid should be
valid, authentic, clear and legible.

It is to be ensured that the complete information as required by this office may
be furnished by the bidders in the prescribed format. Formats submitted with
incomplete information and not conforming to the requirements are liable to be
rejected.

The technical bid shall be opened on the scheduled date 11-08-2025 on 12.30
P.M. in the office of the SCEA in presence of the representatives of the Agency,
if any, who wish to be present at the time of opening the tender.

The Financial Bids of only the technically qualified bidders will be opened at
later stage. The scheduled time and venue etc. will be communicated at an
appropriate time.

The SCEA reserves the right to reject or cancel any or all tenders at any stage
without assigning any reason.

Unfair practices on the part of the bidders at any stage and in any way would be
viewed seriously and involved Agency would be blacklisted.

3.10 The bidders whose services were found unsatisfactory and were prematurely

terminated during the past in SCEA will not be eligible to participate in the bid.

4. TECHNICAL QUALIFICATION CRITERIA — TECHNICAL BID (ENVELOPE NO. 1)

4.1

4.2

4.3

4.4

4.5

4.6

4.7

4.8

4.9

4.10

4.11

The Agency must fulfil the following technical specifications in order to be
eligible for technical evaluation of the bid. The Agency is required to scan
originals of the following documents and upload it in the Technical Bid
(Envelope No. 1), failing which bid shall be summarily / outrightly rejected and
will not be considered any further.

The online envelope clearly marked as “Technical bid (Envelope No.1)” is
required to contain the scanned copies of originals of the following
documents.

Proof regarding submission of tender fee and EMD online i.e. Challan copy
needs to be uploaded.

The Company / Firm / Agency/ co operative society having registration
Certificate under Companies Act, Co-operative Societies Act or Partnership firm
registered under Indian Partnership Act or Proprietary concern and should be
in existence since the last three financial years. Submit relevant documents.

Registration Certificate according to law
Latest License under Shop and Establishment Act.

The Company / Firm / Agency/ co operative society registration certificate
under Goods and Service Act (GST) for providing manpower services.

The Company / Firm / Agency/ co operative society registration certificate
under Employees Provident Fund.

The Company / Firm / Agency/ co operative society registration certificate
under Employee State Insurance Act.

The Company / Firm / Agency/ co operative society PAN Card / TAN number.

Copy of Profession GST Registration Certificate under Goods and Service ACT.

The Company /Firm /Agency/ co operative society should provide a duly signed
self-declaration indicating that they have not been blacklisted by any Ministry
/Department / Organization of the Central Government / State Government or
any Public Sector Undertaking and there is no litigation with any organisation
on account of similar services as per Annexure -4.

Company/ Firm / Agency/ co operative society should submit self-declaration
that there is no case pending with the police/ court of law against the
company/ firm / Agency/ co operative society.

4.12

4.13

4.14

4.15

4.16

5.1

5:2

53

744:

At least three years’ experience certificate of deployment of a minimum of 15
personnel of similar type of manpower mentioned in section 2.2 (requirement
for manpower to be deployed) in the Departments of Government of India/
Central Public Sector Undertakings/ Nationalized Banks /State Government
Departments/ Autonomous Bodies/ International / Multilateral/ United Nations
Agencies etc. The copy of experience certificate issued by the respective offices
should be submitted along with proforma containing details of similar type of
manpower service contract as per Annexure -1.

The turnover certificate from CA (Chartered Accountant) for the last three
financial years in respect of manpower supply work as per Annexure 2.

Duly signed declaration as regards acceptance of terms and conditions on
Company/ Firm / Agency/ co operative society letter head, as per Annexure -3
should be submitted.

Income Tax Return for the last three financial years should be submitted.

Personal and bank details of the Company / Firm / Agency/ co operative society
for RTGS purpose as per Annexure 1-A.

Price Bid (Envelope No. Il) - (Annexure-7)

The bidder should quote his offer through Envelope No. II. The bidder should
not quote his offer anywhere directly or indirectly. Conditional bid will not be
accepted.

As per mentioned in e tender notice/advertisement, per month honorarium will
be paid as per Minimum Wages Act and as per Government guideline by SCEA.
Contractor should only quote their per month Commission/service Charge for
One employee of each category against the same.

In Financial Bid Annexure 7, the bidder must quote their commission in
percentage. The said percentage should not be quoted (at the rate of 00.99%
or less than 0.99%) under any circumstances else the bidder shall

be disqualified from financial bid process.

If the commission percentage quoted by two or more agencies is equal,
preference shall be given to the agency which has rendered satisfactory
service to the SCEA, MS, Pune in the past

Criteria for L1 (lowest rate)

The Agency shall be awarded contract on the basis of the lowest rate of the
commission/service charge per person/month as quoted by the bidder in the
price bid (As per Envelope II). (Annexure-7)

TERMS AND CONDITIONS

General

7.1.1 The Agency shall not be allowed to transfer, assign, pledge or sub-contract its
rights and liabilities under this contract to any other agency.

7.1.2 Placement to manpower would be given by selected Agency for Eleven months,
or for such other term less than that depending on requirement; and which
can be extended from time to time as per requirement. SCEA reserves right to
repatriate services of the manpower deployed, at any point of time, if his/her
services are not found satisfactory.

7.1.3 The Agency will have to provide the required manpower for a shorter period
also, in case of any exigencies as per the requirement of various projects of
SCEA

7.1.4 The required deployed manpower shall be placed at SCEA, Pune only.

7.1.5 The bidder will be bound by the details furnished by him / her to the SCEA
while submitting the tender or at subsequent stage. In case, any of such
documents furnished by him/her is found to be false at any stage, it would be
deemed to be a breach of terms of contract making him / her liable for legal
action besides termination of contract.

7.1.6 Agency shall not have a conflict of interest. The Agency found to have a
conflict of interest in this tender process shall be disqualified. Agency shall be
considered to have a conflict of interest, if:

(a) Submit more than one tender for the work.

(b) If bidders, in two different tenders have controlling shareholders in common.

7.1.7 Bidders are hereby cautioned that tenders containing any material deviation
or reservations shall be considered as non-responsive and liable to be
rejected.

7.1.8 It must be understood and agreed that all factors have properly been
investigated and considered while submitting the Bid. Lack of understanding
of local conditions and laws/regulations outlined above and specified
elsewhere in the specification, will not be entertained as a reason for any
adjustment of price / or for extension of time of completion of the Works
under this Contract.

7.2 Liabilities, Control, etc. on the manpower deployed

7.2.1 The Agency shall ensure that the individual manpower is deployed in SCEA
Pune. The Agency shall ensure that the manpower deployed conforms to,
educational and skill qualifications, job requirements prescribed in this
Tender Document, or as communicated from time to time.

7.2.2 The Agency shall be responsible for any act of indiscipline on the part of
manpower/ persons deployed by them.

7.2.3 The Agency shall be responsible for proper conduct of their manpower/
personnel deployed in SCEA office premises or anywhere else. In case of any
damage/ loss/theft etc. to the property of SCEA which is caused by the
personnel deployed by the agency, the agency will be liable to compensate
such loss on the basis of the value of the property as determined by SCEA,
and the same could be recovered from the performance guarantee/ monthly
payments due to the Agency

7.2.4 The agency shall provide the required number of manpower/ personnel within a
period of one month from the date of the contract, and thereafter within one
month of demand from time to time, and failure to comply with the same or
found deficient in service shall invite penalty of Rs. 500/- per day/per
manpower and /or forfeiture of the performance security deposit and legal
proceeding for the omission/deficiencies in service. If the incidence of penalty
occurs more than five times, then the process of higher penalty and / or
termination, as per clause No.2.1.3 may be initiated.

7.2.5 The agency shall replace within one month any of its manpower/personnel who
is found unacceptable to the SCEA because of security risks, incompetence,
conflict of interest, improper conduct etc. upon receiving written notice from
the SCEA.

7.2.6 The manpower/personnel deployed for SCEA shall not be changed by the agency
in any circumstances without prior permission of SCEA.

7.2.7 The manpower/personnel deployed by the Agency for SCEA shall not claim nor
shall be entitled to any pay, perks and other facilities admissible to
regular/confirmed employees of SCEA during the contract period or after
expiry of the contract period.

7.2.8 In case of termination of this contract on its expiry or otherwise, the persons
deployed by the agency shall not be entitled to and will have no right to claim
for any absorption in the regular/otherwise capacity in the SCEA.

7.2.9 The agency shall provide a substitute well in advance if there is any probability
of the manpower/personnel leaving the job due to his/her own personal
reasons or if there is a long leave required. The payment in respect of the
overlapping period of the substitute shall be the responsibility of the service
provider.

7.2.10 All Services shall be performed by persons qualified and skilled in performing
such services.

7.2.11 The Agency must train manpower/personnel to be deployed in mannerism /
behavior. The Agency's personnel working should be polite, cordial, and
positive and efficient, while handling the assigned work and their actions and
they should promote goodwill and enhance the image of the SCEA. In case, the
person employed by the successful Agency commits any act of
omission/commission that amounts to misconduct/ _ indiscipline/
incompetence, the successful Agency will be liable to take appropriate
disciplinary action against such persons, including their removal from site of
work, and / or such action as directed by SCEA

7.2.12 The Agency’s personnel shall not divulge or disclose to any person, any details
of office, operational process, technical know-how, security arrangements and
administrative / organizational matters as all are of confidential/secret nature
that can attract legal action.

7.2.13 The Agency shall ensure proper dress code and decency in the persons
deployed, conduct in office premises and enforce prohibition of consumption
of alcoholic drinks, pan, smoking, loitering without work.

7.2.14 The Agency shall nominate one HR Coordinator who would be constantly in
SCEA premises and shall be responsible for immediate interaction with the
SCEA so that optimal services of the persons deployed by the agency could be
availed without any disruption. The Agency shall be available at all times and
message sent by email/Fax/SMS/What's app/Special Messenger from SCEA to
the Service Provider shall be acknowledged immediately on receipt on the
same day.

7.2.15 The Agency shall ensure that the personnel deployed are medically fit and will
keep in record a certificate of their medical fitness. The Agency shall withdraw
such manpower who are found medically unfit immediately on receipt of such
a request.

7.2.16 The Agency shall provide Photo Identity Cards to the deployed manpower.
These identity cards must be constantly displayed while on work.

7.2.17 There shall be one weekly holiday on Sunday & all other Govt. holidays. SCEA
will engage deployed persons, if necessary, on Saturday. The deployed persons
may avail 7 Day casual leave for Eleven months with the permission of
Secretary of SCEA.

7.2.18 SCEA shall maintain biometrics and manual attendance registers for manpower
placed for SCEA. And record will be provided to agency time to time for billing
purpose.

7.2.19 The Agency shall furnish the following documents in respect of the
manpower/personnel to be deployed in SCEA before the commencement of
work; and from time to time.

(a) List of manpower/personnel shortlisted by Service Provider Agency for
deployment containing full details;

(b) Detailed bio-data of manpower/personnel to be deployed in SCEA in
Annexure 5.

7.2.20 The Service provider Agency should arrange for interviews for shortlisting
personnel for providing necessary manpower/personnel. The representative of
SCEA will be present as an observer while shortlisting the personnel. The
service provider Agency shall furnish such short list along with bio-data &
photograph of the personnel to be deployed. The deployment will be done
from out of this short list as per requirement of SCEA

7.2.21 Agency shall maintain a complaint book, which should be made available as
and when required.

7.2.22 The Agency shall be responsible for all injuries and accidents to manpower
deployed by him. The manpower shall be insured against personal accidents
arising out of and during the course of their duties. In the event of injury,
illness or accidents to any manpower, SCEA will not be liable to pay any
compensation. The insurance cover shall include the liability under the
Workmen's Compensation Act which will be the responsibility of Agency.

7.2.23 The Service Provider shall be held responsible for any loss/damage to the
equipment and instruments of the SCEA provided to the manpower deployed
by the Service Provider due to the negligence or wilful damage as assessed by
the SCEA and recovery of such loss/damage will be recovered from the Agency.

7.2.24 The agency shall provide the required number of manpower/ personnel

7.3 Legal Compliances

7.3.1 The Agency shall comply with all Acts, laws or other statutory rules,
regulations, bylaws applicable or which might become applicable with regard
to the performance of the work included herein or touching this contract but
not, limited to P.F. and Misc. Provision Act, M.C.S Act 1960 and other
applicable Acts, Rules and Regulations etc. The Agency shall keep SCEA and its
officials indemnified from and against all actions, claims, demands and

10

liabilities whatsoever under and in respect of the breach of the provision of any
Acts, Rules and Regulations as may be applicable from time to time.

7.3.2 The Agency will be responsible for compliance and strict adherence of all

71633

statutory provisions relating to Provident Fund, and Employees State Insurance
etc. in respect of the persons deployed by it at and for SCEA.

The Agency shall also be liable for depositing all taxes, levies, Cess etc. on
account of service rendered by it to SCEA to concerned tax collection
authorities from time to time as per rules and regulations on the matter. In
case, the Agency fails to comply with any statutory/taxation liability under
appropriate law, and as a result thereof the SCEA is put to any loss/obligation,
monetary or otherwise, the SCEA will deduct the same from the monthly bills
and or the Performance Security Deposit of the agency, to the extent of the
loss or obligation in monetary terms.

7.3.4 The Agency shall maintain all Statutory Registers under the Law. The agency

shall produce the same, on demand, to the concerned authority of the SCEA or
any concerned authority under the law.

7.3.5 The Tax Deduction at Source (T.D.S.) shall be deducted as per the provisions of

Income Tax Act, as amended from time to time and a certificate to this effect
shall be provided to the agency by SCEA.

7.3.6 The Agency will accept full and exclusive liability for all the payments to be made

by it to its staff in accordance with the laws of the land including any statutory
obligations under the law imposed by the Central Government / State
Government / Any other statutory bodies. Any new statutory liability / levy
imposed after the commencement of contract will be borne / compensated by
the Agency.

7.3.7 The Agreement shall be terminated in the event of non-performance, deviation

any of the terms and conditions of contract, non-payment of remuneration of
deployed manpower and non-payment of statutory dues. SCEA will have no
liability towards non-payment of remuneration to the persons employed by the
Agency and the outstanding statutory dues of the service provider to statutory
authorities. If any loss or damage is caused to the SCEA by the manpower
deployed, the same shall be recovered from the unpaid bills or adjustment
from the Security Deposited by the concerned Agency with SCEA.

7.3.8 For all intents and purposes, the Agency shall be the "Employer" within the

meaning of different Rules & Acts in respect of manpower so deployed. The
manpower deployed by the Agency shall not have any claim whatsoever like
employer and employee relationship with or against the SCEA.

7.3.9 Each Bidder unconditionally agrees] understands and accepts that the SCEA

reserves the right to accept or reject any or all Bids without giving any reason.
Neither the SCEA nor its employees or advisers shall entertain any claim of any

11

nature, whatsoever, including without limitation, any claim seeking expenses in
relation to the preparation of Bids.

7.4 Financial

7.4.1 The Earnest Money Deposit (EMD) Rs.25628/- (Rupees Twenty Five Thousand
six Hundred twenty eight only) should be submitted online and scanned copy
of Challan should be uploaded with Technical Bid, failing which the tender shall
be rejected outright.

7.4.2 The EMD in respect of the agencies which do not qualify the Technical Bid (First
Stage) / Financial Bid (Second competitive stage) shall be returned to them
without any interest within 30 days of opening of the tender.

7.4.3 The successful Agency will be required to execute an agreement with SCEA as
per “Schedule-1” within the period specified in the award letter. This
agreement will have to be executed on stamp paper as per government norms.
The cost of stamp duty and registration charges is to be borne by the Agency.
The agreement will have to be registered with concerned government
authority. In case the successful agency fails to enter into the agreement with
SCEA within the specified date mentioned in the award letter, the EMD
deposited by such Agency shall stand forfeited without giving any further
notice.

a) Within 15 (fifteen) days after receipt of award letter, the successful Agency
shall deposit Security Deposit @ 3% of Tender cost in the form of Demand
draft OR Bank guarantee issued by a nationalized bank. The security deposit
shall be refunded only after satisfactory execution and completion of the
contract.

b) No interest will be paid on security deposit amount.

c) On request of the successful Bidder, the Earnest Money Deposit (EMD) can
be adjusted in the Security Deposit

7.4.4 The entire financial liability in respect of manpower/personnel services
deployed in SCEA shall be that of the Agency and SCEA will in no way be liable.
It will be the responsibility of the Agency to pay to the person deployed a sum
not less than the rates prescribed in Annexure 7 directly by NEFT to their
accounts. The Agency shall provide bank accounts details of deployed
personnel to SCEA.

7.4.5 In case of breach of any terms and conditions of this agreement, the
performance Security Deposit of the Agency shall be liable to be forfeited
besides termination of the Agreement, and/ or blacklisting of the agency.

7.4.6 The Secretary, SCEA reserves the right to withdraw/modify any of the terms and
conditions mentioned above so as to overcome the problems/matters
encountered at a later stage.

12

7.4.7 The consolidated wages/pay payable shall be as per the rate prescribed by
SCEA in Annexure 7 and as may be prescribed from time to time which will
be paid to agency by SCEA.

7.4.8 The agency shall be liable for all kinds of dues payable in respect of the
personnel provided under the contract and the SCEA shall not be liable for
any dues for availing the services of the personnel.

7.4.9 The Agency shall make regular and full payment of the amounts due to the
deployed manpower/personnel, as per existing rules and regulations and
furnish necessary proofs whenever required by SCEA.

7.4.10 The Agreement is liable to be terminated because of non-performance,
deviation of terms and conditions of contract, non-payment of remuneration of
employed persons and non-payment of statutory dues. The Department or
Office concerned will have no liability towards non-payment of remuneration
to the persons employed by the Service Provider and the outstanding statutory
dues of the service provider to statutory authorities. If any loss or damage is
caused to the Department or Office concerned by the persons deployed, the
same shall be recovered from the unpaid bills or adjusted from the
Performance Security Deposit.

7.5. Terms of payment

7.5.1 The Agency shall make regular and full payment of wages and other payments
as due to its personnel deputed under service contract and furnish necessary
proof every month to SCEA. The payment of manpower by the Agency would
be made on or before 7th of every month. In case 7th day being a holiday
wages should be paid on the next working day of the month.

7.5.2 The Agency will ensure the remittance of the wages to the manpower deployed
by them in SCEA through Bank Account and a proof thereof will be furnished to
SCEA every month along with the bills.

7.5.3 Proof of Goods and Service Tax, P.F., E.S.I.C, other taxes deposited with the
concerned authority shall be submitted with the bill by agency.

7.5.4 In case SCEA receives any complaints regarding non-payment of wages to the
manpower deployed in SCEA, the amount payable to the deployed manpower
will be recovered from the bills of Agency and will be paid directly to such
manpower.

7.5.5. The first consolidated pay of the deployed manpower/personnel will be
released only after submission of documents for -police verification to the
police authorities. The Agency has to submit police verification report within
one months of deployment of the person, failing which bills of the Agency will
not be processed and paid.

13

7.6

Settlement of Disputes

All disputes or differences of any kind whatsoever that may arise between the
SCEA, and the successful bidder in connection with or arising out of the
contract or subject matter thereof, whether during the progress of contract or
after its completion shall be settled as under:

7.7 Mutual Settlement

7.8

73

7.10

All such disputes or differences shall in the first place be referred by the Bidder
to the SCEA in writing for resolving the same through mutual discussions,
negotiations, deliberation etc. associating representatives from both the sides
and concerted efforts shall be made for reaching amicable settlement of
disputes or differences.

Arbitration

7.8.1 It is a term of this contract that Arbitration to resolve disputes shall not
be commenced unless an attempt has first been made by the parties to settle
such disputes through mutual settlement.

7.8.2 If the Bidder is not satisfied with the mutual settlement on any matter in
question, disputes or differences, the Bidder may refer to the Secretary, SCEA
in writing to settle such disputes or differences through Arbitration, provided
that the demand for Arbitration shall specify the matters, which are in question
or subject of the disputes or differences as also the amount of claim, item wise.
Only such dispute(s), or difference(s) in respect of which the demand has been
made, together with counter claims of the SCEA shall be referred to Arbitrator
and other matters shall not be included in the reference.

7.8.3 The Secretary, SCEA shall appoint Additional Registrar co-operative
societies of co-operative Dept as Arbitrator. The Arbitration proceedings shall
be governed by the provisions of the Indian Arbitration and Conciliation Act
1996 or any statutory modification or re-enactment thereof and the rules made
there under and for the time being in force shall apply to the conciliation and
arbitration proceedings under this clause.

7.8.4 The arbitration proceedings shall be held at a place decided by the
Arbitrator.

Settlement through Court

It is a term of this contract that the Bidder shall not approach any Court of Law for
settlement of such disputes or differences unless an attempt has first been made
by the parties to settle such disputes or differences through Arbitration.

Jurisdiction of Courts
Jurisdiction al courté for dispute resolution shall be PUNE only.

९.४ सदस्य ae पा fy
तथा सहाय्यक सह. तथा उपसहकारी निवडणूक तथासह. तथा सचिव

निवडणूक आयुकत आयुकत निवडणूक आयुकत निवडणूक प्राधिकरण

14

Annexure-1
(To be scanned and uploaded in technical Envelope)

Proforma containing details of similar manpower service contract

Name & | No. of] Level, type
address | personnel | and salary
of the Supplied
organiza
tion with
contact

Period of | Whether
contract | Govt/ Semi

Govt/ Private
sectors/Auton
omous bodies

Cost of | Status
contract | whether
Rs.(in completed/
lakhs) ongoing

(Signature of Authorized Person)

Place: Name.
Date: Designation
Address:

Seal

Annexure-1-A
(To be scanned and uploaded in technical Envelope)

Personal & Bank Details for RTGS

All columns are mandatory

Personal Detail
NAME OF THE COMPETANT
PERSON & AGENCY

Tt
ADDRESS OF THE AGENCY

CONTACT DETAILS 1) LANDLINE NO.:

2) MOBAIL NO.:

3) e-mail ID:

है...
Bank Details —

ADDRESS OF THE

BRANCH

IFSC CODE

es

MICR NO.

(Signature of Authorized Person)

Place: Name

Date: Designation
Address:
Seal

16

Annexure — 2
(To be scanned and uploaded in technical Envelope)
(Printed on letter head)

Turnover Certificate

Name of the Company/Firm/Agency/Co operative Society:

Address of the Company/Firm/Agency/Co operative Society:

This is to certify that | have verified the annual turnover of the Company/firm/Agency/ Co
operative Society named above for supply of manpower services, and it is as mentioned

below; and that it is correct.

Description year year year

Rs. (both, in Rs.. (both, in —|Rs.. (both, in
figures and figures and figures and
words ) words ) words )

Annual Turnover in respect of supply of
manpower services

Place:- Name, Address, Signature and Seal of the Chartered
Date:- Accountant

17

6.1.

Place:
Date:

Annexure-3

(To be scanned and uploaded in technical Envelope)

(Printed on letterhead)

SELF DECLARATION

Declaration as regards acceptance of terms and conditions of contract

| Shri. /Smt. Proprietor /Secretary /authorized
signatory of the Company/Firm/Agency/ Co operative Society M/s ----------------

am competent to sign this declaration and execute this tender document;

| have carefully read and understood all the terms and conditions of the
tender and undertake to abide by them;

The information/documents furnished along with the tender are true and
authentic to the best of my knowledge and belief. | / We, am / are well aware
of the fact that furnishing of any false information / fabricated document
would lead to rejection of my tender at any stage, besides the liabilities
towards prosecution under appropriate law.

(Signature of Authorized Person)
Name
Designation
Address:
Seal

18

Annexure-4
(To be scanned and uploaded in technical Envelope)
(Printed on letterhead)

Self-Declaration regarding not being blacklisted

| Shri / Smt. ------------------ Proprietor/Secretary/Authorized signatory of the
Company/ firm/ Agency/ Co operative Society M/S.--------------------------------------------------
कि, hereby declare that we are not black-listed by any Central/State
Government/Public Sector Undertaking or any other organization for providing

manpower services in India or elsewhere.

We are not involved in any litigation that may have an impact on execution of

contract or may compromise the delivery of service as required under this tender.

(Signature of Authorized Person)

Place: Name

Date: Designation
Address:
Seal

19

Annexure — 5
Detailed Biodata of manpower

Biodata Recent
Photo
_Name of the Post
Surname
ie == सते eas)
Middle name
| Male

Marital Status: Married ey nmarried

Be] Female

Address for communication:- Permanent address:-

Mobile No Landline No.

E-mail Address
Date of Age Years
Birth

Religion: Caste Category

Qualification * (Start from higher
qualification

Name of Degree / Diploma Percentage / Grade

Experience * (Start from office where you are working presently, if not working presently mentioned where
you were last working)

Length of Service
Months

yping g
Sr. No. Name of Degree / Diploma University/ Percentage / Grade
institution

Please write on separate paper, if the space is short.

Give details of Research Projects, Publication with Peer Review Journals

Please attach all attested xerox copies of qualifications, experiences, Computer/Technical/Typing Knowledge
certificates, caste certificate along with this bio-data

Please attach all attested xerox copies of proof of identity like Driving license, Aadhar No., Proof of Residence.

(Signature of person for deployment) (Signature of the Authorised Person of Agency)

20

Annexure — 6

DOCUMENTS TO BE SUBMITTED BY THE SUCCESSFUL AGENCY BEFORE
DEPLOYMENT OF MANPOWER

1. Agreement on stamp paper of appropriate denomination as decided by SCEA.

2. Detailed bio-data of manpower to be deployed in SCEA in Annexure 5.

3. Letter indicating the name, designation and telephone number of the HR
coordinator and supervisors nominated by the agency.

4. Police verification proof of each manpower to be deployed in SCEA.

5. Performance Security Deposit of @ of 3 % of Tender Cost.

6. Any other document considered relevant, as required by SCEA.

21

ANNEXURE-7
Price Bid (Envelope No. II)

The Agency is required to quote the amount separately for each item per person/ per
month in Rupees in column No. 3 only.

Amount of Honorarium per deployed person in Rs.
(per person per month)
(amount should be quoted separately for each item)

| 51. no. | Perticulars | Rs. |
[ad ae डिड Nee won Seal
Clerk cum Typist
And डी Basic
al peon

DA

2

3
4 _|Leave With Wages (LW.

5 Ei ee na ereeree |
26:21

7
Eel

PF- Employers Contribution
ESI- Employers Contribution

abour Welfare Fund (LWF
सि ransport Allowance
aw Washing Allowance

ate Contractor profit per person

12 _ | Service Charges / Administrative Charges

Total Cost Per Month Per Person

Note:- G.S.T. or any other taxes will be paid as per actual by the successful bidder.

(Signature of Authorized Person)

Place: Name

Date: Designation
Address:
Seal

22