CHAPTER I. PRELIMINARY base for
bye-laws
rule
1 Name of the Society
(a) The name of the Society shall be
"…………………………..…… " Co-operative Housing
Society Ltd.”
Name of the
Society
existing
provision
as per the
Society
registration
(b) No change in the name of the Society shall be valid unless it is
approved by the General Body by the prescribed majority and
registered by the Registrar in accordance with the provisionsof
Section 15 of the Maharashtra Co-operative Societies Act,
1960 read with Rule 14 of the Maharashtra Co-operative
Societies Rules, 1961.
After registration of such change, the Society shall intimate the
same to all concerned statutory authorities, local bodies, banks,
utility service providers and other institutions with which the
Society has dealings.
Procedure for
change in
name
as per Sec.
15
(c) The Society is classified under the major class “Housing” and
is registered as a Tenant Co-partnership Housing Society, as
per its registration certificate issued by the Registrar under the
Maharashtra Co-operative Societies Act, 1960.
In a Tenant Co-partnership Housing Society, the land and
building are owned by the Society, and the members hold
shares in the Society along with a right of occupancy in the
flats or units allotted to them.
Classification as per Rule
10
(d) The Society shall ensure that its name, registration number and
classification are correctly recorded and updated in all statutory
records and communications.
Registration
Records
existing
general
provision
2 The registered address of the Society shall be as under:
…………………………………………………………………
…
(a) The registered address shall ordinarily be the location of the
property of the Society, unless otherwise permitted by the
Registrar for specific reasons.
Address of the
Society
existing
general
provision
1

(b) The Society shall maintain an official address for
correspondence as may be decided by the Committee. The
Society may also maintain an official email address and such
digital communication platform as may be approved by the
Committee.
Any notice, communication or intimation issued through such
approved mode shall be treated as valid service, subject to the
provisions of the Act, the Rules and these Bye-laws.
Mode of
Communicati
on
(c) Any change in the registered address of the Society shall be
intimated to the Registering Authority and all concerned
authorities within thirty days from the date of such change.
Address for
Corresponden
ce
(d) Any change in the registered address shall be effected only
after following the procedure prescribed under the Rules.
Procedure for
changing the
address of the
Society
(e) The Society shall exhibit at a prominent place at the main
entrance of its building or premises a board displaying its
name, registration number and registered address.
The Society may also display contact details, office timings,
emergency contact information and such digital reference,
including QR code, as may be decided by the Committee.
Exhibition of
Name Board
3 These Bye-laws are framed in conformity with the provisions
of the Maharashtra Co-operative Societies Act, 1960 and the
Maharashtra Co-operative Societies Rules, 1961.
In case of any inconsistency between these Bye-laws and the
provisions of the Act or the Rules, the provisions of the Act
and the Rules shall prevail.
Supremacy of
Act & Rules
existing
provision
as per
Rule106 C-
13
CHAPTER II. INTERPRETATIONS
4 Unless otherwise separately provided in these bye-laws, the
following words and terms shall have the meaning assigned to
them herein :—
existing
provisions
and made
changes as
per the
Housing
Chapter
(i) “Act” means the Maharashtra Co-operative Societies Act,
1960.
Act
(ii) “Rules” means the Maharashtra Co-operative Societies Rules,
1961.
Rules
2

(iii) “Bye-laws” means the bye-laws of the Society registered under
the Act and for the time being in force, and includes registered
amendments thereof.
Bye-laws
(iv) “Allottee” means a Member of a housing society to whom a
Flat in a building or complex held by it, is allotted by the co-
operative society, or a person who has purchased a Flat from
the developer or competent authority and joined as a Member
of the society.
Allottee
(v) “Architect” means a person registered as an architect under the
provisions of the Architects Act, 1972.
Architect
(vi) “Association of Societies” means an association of,—
(a) not less than five registered co-operative housing societies, and Association of
Societies
(b) in which the voting rights are so regulated that the Members
which are housing societies have not less than four-fifths of the
total number of votes in the general meeting of such society.
(vii) “Auditor” means a person or an auditing firm who or which
has been empanelled on the panel approved by the State
Government under sub-section (1) of section 81.
Auditor
(viii) “Builder Promoter” means,—
(a) a person who constructs or causes to be constructed an
independent building or a building consisting of flats, or
converts an existing building or a part thereof into flats
including the re-development of building or buildings, for the
purpose of selling all or some of the flats to other persons and
includes his assignees; or
(b) a person who develops land into a project, whether or not the
person also constructs structures on any of the plots, for the
purpose of selling to other persons all or some of the plots in
the said project, whether with or without structures thereon; or
Builder
Promoter
(c) any development authority or any other public body in respect
of allottees of buildings or flats, as the case may be,
constructed by such authority or body on lands owned by it or
placed at its disposal by the Government, or plots owned by
such authority or body or placed at its disposal by the
Government, for the purpose of selling all or some of the flats
or plots; or
(d) an apex State level co-operative housing finance society and a
primary co-operative housing society which constructs flats or
buildings for its Members or in respect of the allottees of such
flats or buildings; or
3

(e) any other person who acts himself as a builder, coloniser,
contractor, developer, estate developer or by any other name or
claims to be acting as the holder of a power of attorney from
the owner of the land on which the building or flat is
constructed or plot is developed for sale; or
(f) such other person who constructs any building or apartment for
sale to the general public.
(ix) “Chief Promoter” means a promoter who has been elected so in
the meeting of promoters for registration of a housing or
premises society.
Chief
Promoter
(x) “Corpus Fund” means payment received or receivable by the
society from the developer in lieu of surrendering its
development rights of plot by way of registered document or
contributed by Members for any purpose as decided in general
meeting.
Corpus Fund
(xi) “Co-operative Housing Association” means association of
housing societies or other legal bodies for the purpose of
maintenance of common amenities or conveyance of land and
common amenities in respect of plot or layout.
Co-operative
Housing
Association
(xii) “Committee” means the managing Committee or other
governing body of a society to which the direction and control
of the management of the affairs of a society is entrusted.
Managing
Committee
(xiii) “Committee Member” means a Member of the society who has
been elected or co-opted or nominated in accordance with the
Act, Rules and bye-laws of the society.
Committee
Member
(xiv) “Defaulter” means a Member or flat owner or occupier who
fails to pay the dues of the society within three months from
the date of service of bill or notice or due date of payment,
whichever is later.
Defaulter
(xv) “Dues” means the amount payable by a Member or flat owner
to the society and demanded by the society by issuing bill or
notice in writing and such demand is based on the provisionsof
the Act, Rules and bye-laws of the society.
Dues
4

(xvi) “Flat” means block, chamber, dwelling unit, apartment, office,
showroom, shop, godown, premises, suit, tenement, unit or by
any other name, and means a separate and self-contained part
of any immovable property, including one or more rooms or
enclosed spaces, located on one or more floors or any part
thereof, in a building or on a plot of land, used or intended to
be used for any residential or commercial use such as
residence, office, shop, showroom or godown or for carrying
on any business, occupation, profession or trade, or for any
other type of use ancillary to the purpose specified.
Flat
(xvii) “General Body” means all the Members of the society. General Body
(xviii) “General Meeting” means meeting of the General Body called
and conducted in accordance with the provisions of the Act,
Rules and bye-laws.
General
Meeting
(xix) “Housing Federation” means the State or District Federal
Society notified by the Government in the Official Gazette to
be the representative of the registered Housing Societies of the
specified areas notified by the Government, from time to time.
Housing
Federation
(xx) “Housing Society” means a society, the object of which is to
provide its Members with open plots for housing, dwelling
houses or flats; or if open plots, the dwelling houses or flats are
already acquired, to provide its Members common amenities
and services and to demolish existing buildings and reconstruct
or to construct additional tenements or premises by using
potential of the land.
Housing
Society
(a) “Tenant Ownership Housing Society” means a society the
object of which is to allot the plots to its Members to construct
the dwelling unit or flats thereon or to allot the dwelling units
already constructed and where land is held either on lease hold
or free hold basis by the society and houses are owned or to be
owned by the Members.
Tenant
Ownership
Housing
Society
(b) “Tenant Co-partnership Housing Society” means a society the
object of which is to allot the flats already constructed or to be
constructed to its Members and where both land and building
or buildings are held either on free-hold or lease-hold basis by
the society.
Tenant Co-
partnership
Housing
Society
5

(c) “Other Housing Societies” means the house mortgage co-
operative societies, house construction co-operative housing
societies and premises co-operative societies where all the units
are offices or commercial galas.
Other
Housing
Societies
(xxi) “Member” means a person joining in an application for the
registration of a housing society which is subsequently
registered, or a person duly admitted to Membership of a
society after its registration and includes associate or joint or
provisional Member.
Member
(a) “Associate Member” means husband, wife, father, mother,
brother, sister, son, daughter, son-in-law, daughter-in-law,
nephew, niece or a person duly admitted to Membership of a
housing society on written recommendation of a Member to
exercise his rights and duties with his written prior consent and
whose name does not stand in the share certificate.
Associate
Member
(b) “Joint Member” means a person joining in an application for
the registration of a housing society jointly, which is
subsequently registered or a person who is duly admitted to
Membership after its registration and who holds share, right,
title and interest in the flat jointly but whose name does not
stand first in the share certificate.
Joint Member
(c) “Provisional Member” means a person who is duly admitted as
a Member of a society temporarily after death of a Member on
the basis of nomination till the admission of legal heir or heirs
as the Member of the society in place of deceased Member.
Provisional
Member
(xxii) “Officer” means a person elected or appointed by a society to
any office according to its bye-laws; and includes any office
bearer such as a chairperson, vice-chairperson, president, vice-
president, secretary, joint secretary, treasurer, joint treasurer,
Member of the Committee, manager and any other person, by
whatever name called, elected or appointed under the Act, the
Rules or the bye-laws, to give directions in regard to the
business of such society.
Officer
(xxiii) “Person” includes,—
(a) an individual, who is competent to contract under the Indian
Contract Act, 1872;
(b) the State Government;
(c) the Central Government;
(d) a Hindu Undivided Family;
6

(e) a company registered under the law for the time being in force;
(f) a firm registered under the Indian Partnership Act, 1932 or the
Limited Liability Partnership Act, 2008;
Person
(g) local authority;
(h) an association of persons or body of individuals whether
incorporated or not;
(i) a co-operative society registered under any law relating to co-
operatives;
(j) a public trust or family trust formed in accordance with
relevant provisions of law;
(k) any legal body which can hold the immovable property; and
(l) any entity as may be notified by the State Government, from
time to time.
(xxiv) “Plot” means a piece of land numbered and shown as one plot
in a layout sanctioned or to be sanctioned by the competent
authority.
Plot
(xxv) “Promoter” means a person intending to become a Memberof
a proposed society and who becomes the Member on its
registration.
Promoter
(xxvi) “Proposed Society” means the society the proposal of which is
submitted by the builder promoter or by the chief promoter to
the Registrar and which has been granted permission for
reservation of name and opening account in bank in its name.
Proposed
Society
(xxvii) “State Co-operative Election Authority” means an authority
constituted or nominated by the State Government for the
purposes of superintendence, direction and control of the
preparation of the electoral roll for and conduct of electionsof
the Committee of a society.
State Co-
operative
Election
Authority
(xxviii) “Parking Space” means an open space, stilt, basement, podium
or mechanized parking provided by the Society.
Parking Space
(xxix) “Parking Slot” means a demarcated and numbered individual
parking slot for a vehicle.
Parking Slot
(xxx) “Common Areas and Facilities” means the land on which the
building is located, foundations, main walls, roofs, corridors,
lobbies, stairways, lifts, parking spaces, open terraces, gardens,
storage spaces, installations of services, common utility
systems, community facilities and all other parts of the
property necessary or convenient for its existence,
maintenance, safety and common use.
Common
Areas and
Facilities
(xxxi) “Papers” means the records, registers, books and documentsof
the Society referred to in these bye-laws.
Papers
7

(xxxii) “Working Capital” means funds at the disposal of the Society
inclusive of paid-up share capital, funds created out of profits,
and money raised by borrowing or by any other lawful means.
Working
Capital
(xxxiii) “Family” means, for the purposes of these bye-laws, husband,
wife, father, mother, brother, sister, son, daughter, son-in-law,
daughter-in-law, nephew and niece.
Explanation 1.—For the purpose of section 154B-2, the
expression “Member of a family” means wife, husband, father,
mother, dependent son or unmarried dependent daughter.
Family
Explanation 2.— For the purpose of the definition of Associate
Member, the relatives specified in section 154B-1(18)(a) shall
apply.
Words and expressions used in these bye-laws but not defined
herein shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in
the Act and the Rules.
CHAPTER III. AREA OF OPERATION
5 The area of operation of the Society shall be confined to the
property situated at:
…………………………………………………………………
………………
being the property known as
…………………………………… Co-operative Housing
Society Ltd.,
situated at ……………… Road, ……………… Nagar,
……………… Village/ Ward/ Sector/ Taluka ………………,
District ………………,
bearing Survey No./ CTS No./ Plot No. ……………………,
and falling within the limits of
…………………………………… local authority.
existing
provisions,
as per the
registration
6 The area of operation of the Society may be extended, reduced
or otherwise modified with the approval of the Registrar, in
accordance with the provisions of the Act and the Rules.
Area of
Operation
existing
provisions,
as per the
registration
CHAPTER IV. OBJECTS OF THE SOCIETY
8

7 The objects of the Society shall be as under:— existing
provisions
and new 6
objects are
added to
consider
redevelop
ment
related
provisions
(a) To obtain conveyance or deemed conveyance of the land and
building in favour of the Society in accordance with the
provisions of law.
Conveyance
of Land and
Building
(b) To manage, maintain, repair and replace the property of the
Society, including the building or buildings, common areas and
facilities, and to ensure proper upkeep and safety thereof.
Management
and
Maintenance
of Property
(c) To raise funds for achieving the objects of the Society and to
utilise the same in accordance with the provisions of the Act,
the Rules and these bye-laws.
Raising of
Funds
(d) To establish and maintain funds such as the Reserve Fund,
Repairs and Maintenance Fund, Sinking Fund, Major Repairs
Fund, and such other funds as may be required under the Act,
the Rules and these bye-laws.
Establishment
and
Maintenance
of Funds
(e) To provide amenities and services to the Members and to
regulate their use in accordance with the provisions of the Act,
the Rules and these bye-laws.
Provision of
Amenities and
Services
(f) To frame and enforce regulations in respect of the use of flats,
common areas and facilities, and to ensure peaceful and orderly
occupation by the Members.
Regulations
for Use of
Flats and
Common
Areas
(g) To ensure compliance with the provisions of the Act, the Rules
and these bye-laws by all Members, occupants and users of the
Society premises.
Compliance
with Laws
and Bye-laws
(h) To undertake redevelopment / reconstruction of the propertyof
the Society in accordance with the provisions of the Act, the
Rules, Government directives and the resolutions of the
General Body.
Redevelopme
nt of Society
Property
9

(i) To enter into contracts, agreements or arrangements with any
person, authority or agency for carrying out the objects of the
Society.
Contracts and
Arrangements
(j) To take such measures as may be necessary for the welfare,
convenience and safety of the Members and for the efficient
functioning of the Society.
Welfare and
Safety of
Members
(k) To promote co-operative principles, awareness & training
among the members, and to organise and encourage social and
cultural welfare activities.
promote co-
operative
principles &
cultural
activities
(l) To do all such other acts and things as are incidental or
conducive to the attainment of the above objects.
Incidental
Acts
CHAPTER V. AFFILIATION
8 The Society, immediately after its registration, may become a
member of the following co-operative institutions, as
applicable:—
existing
provisions
(a) the District / Taluka / Ward Co-operative Housing Federation
or the notified Housing Federation of the area in which the
Society is situated;
Membership
of Co-
operative
Housing
Federation
(b) the District Central Co-operative Bank of the district; and Membership
of District
Central Co-
operative
Bank
(c) any other co-operative organisation or institution, membership
of which is required or considered necessary under the
provisions of the Act, the Rules or any lawful directions issued
by the State Government, the Registrar or any competent
authority.
Membership
of Other Co-
operative
Organisations
9 Where the State Government has specified the Society or class
of societies for contribution under the Act, or where a Housing
Federation has been notified for the area, the Society shall
contribute to the Co-operative Education and Training Fund or
the Education and Training Fund, as the case may be, at such
rates, within such period and in such manner as may be
prescribed or notified from time to time.
Contribution
to Education
and Training
Fund
as per Sec.
154B-6
10

10 Where the Society becomes a member of any co-operative
institution referred to in Bye-law No. 8, it shall pay such
entrance fee, membership subscription, contribution and other
charges as may be payable in accordance with the bye-laws,
regulations or lawful demands of such institution:
Provided that, where any contribution or payment is required
under the Act, the Rules or Government directions, the Society
shall be liable to make such payment notwithstanding that it
has or has not taken formal membership of such institution.
Payment of
Subscription
and Charges
existing
provision
11.
The Society may organise co-operative education and training
for its Members, Committee Members, officers and employees
through such Housing Federation, State federal society or State
Apex Training Institute as may be specified or notified by the
State Government, and may avail of guidance, advisory
services, model bye-laws and other assistance made available
by such institutions for proper management and functioningof
the Society.
Co-operative
Education and
Training
CHAPTER VI. FUNDS, SHARE CAPITAL AND
CHARGES
12 The funds of the Society may be raised in one or more of the
following ways:—

(i) by entrance fees; as per the
existing
provisions
(ii) by issue of shares and collection of share capital;
(iii) by contributions, service charges, maintenance charges and
other charges levied from Members for maintenance, repairs,
common services and other purposes, in accordance with the
provisions of the Act, the Rules and Government directions
issued from time to time;
(iv) by deposits received from Members and, where permissible,
from non-members, in accordance with the provisions of the
Act and the Rules;
Raising of
Funds
(v) by loans raised from co-operative banks, including the District
Central Co-operative Bank, or from any other financial
institution or agency permitted under the Act and the Rules;
(vi) by grants, subsidies or financial assistance from the
Government, local authority or any other lawful source, and by
voluntary donations, provided that—
(a) such donations shall not be collected as a condition for—
(i) admission of a Member;
11

(ii) transfer of shares and interest in the Society; or
(iii) grant of any permission/NOC, approval or consent by the
Society;
(b) such donations shall be made voluntarily and without any
coercion; and
(c) such donations shall be duly accounted for and reflected in the
books of the Society;
(vii) by transfer fees, premium, non-occupancy charges, parking
charges, interest on dues, penalties and such other charges as
may be levied in accordance with the provisions of the Act, the
Rules and Government directions;
(viii) by income derived from the property of the Society, including
use of common areas and facilities, amenities, services,
installations or any other lawful use permitted under the Act
and the Rules;
(ix) by contributions to various funds of the Society as provided
under these bye-laws and the Rules;
(x) by any other lawful means, with the approval of the General
Body and in accordance with the provisions of the Act and the
Rules.
13 Share Capital as per the
existing
provisions
(a) The authorised share capital of the Society shall be Rs.______/-
(Rupees __________ only) divided into ______ shares of Rs.
50/- each and the paid up share capital of Rs.______ divided
into ______ share of Rs. 50/-
(b) The issued and subscribed share capital of the Society shall
consist of shares subscribed by the Members from time to time
in accordance with these bye-laws.
(c) The paid-up share capital of the Society shall be the amount
actually paid by the Members towards the shares subscribed by
them.
Share Capital,
Entrance Fee
and Transfer
(d) Every Member shall subscribe to at least five shares of the
Society and shall pay the full value thereof at the time of
admission or within such period as may be decided by the
Committee.
(e) The share capital of the Society may be increased with the
approval of the General Body and in accordance with the
provisions of the Act and the Rules.
(f) The liability of the Members shall be limited to the extentof
the value of shares subscribed by them.
12

14 Share Certificate as per the
existing
provisions
(a) The Society shall issue a share certificate to every Member in
respect of the shares held by him within the period of six
month from the allotment of the shares.
Every share certificate shall bear the seal of the Society and
shall be signed by the Chairman, the Secretary and one
Member of the Committee duly authorised by the Committee,
and shall be issued under the authority of the Committee
through the Secretary of the Society.
The Society shall maintain a register of share certificates and
shall keep proper records thereof in physical and/or digital
form.
Issue of Share
Certificate to
Members
(b) Upon completion of redevelopment or reconstruction of the
Society’s building or buildings, the Society shall issue fresh
share certificates to the Members.
The existing Members shall be issued fresh share certificates in
respect of the premises allotted to them in accordance with the
approved plans and agreements executed.
The original share certificates shall be surrendered and
cancelled before issuance of fresh share certificates.
The Society shall also issue share certificates to new Members
admitted in respect of newly created flats or units.
Such share certificates shall be issued within a period of six
months from the date of receipt of occupation certificate or
completion of redevelopment, whichever is earlier.
The Society shall ensure that the particulars recorded in the
share certificates correspond with the records of the Society,
agreements executed and statutory approvals obtained.
Issue of Share
Certificate
after
Redevelopme
nt
new
provision
for
accommod
ated new
members
15 Duplicate Share Certificate existing
provision
(a) The Committee may issue a duplicate share certificate where
the original share certificate is lost or destroyed, upon the
Member making an application to the Society and submitting—
(i) a copy of the police complaint or non-cognizable complaint
lodged in respect of such loss.
13

(ii) an indemnity bond in the prescribed form; and a self-
declaration or affidavit stating the circumstances of such loss
or destruction.
Issue of
Duplicate
Share
Certificate in
case of Loss
or Destruction
(b) Where the original share certificate is damaged, defaced, torn
or mutilated, the Committee may issue a duplicate share
certificate upon—
(i) submission of an application by the Member;
(ii) submission of an indemnity bond and affidavit; and
(iii) surrender of the original share certificate.
(c) Every duplicate share certificate shall be issued in accordance
with the provisions of the Act, the Rules and these bye-laws,
and shall be recorded in the register of share certificates
maintained by the Society.
The duplicate share certificate shall be clearly marked as
“Duplicate” and shall bear appropriate reference to the original
share certificate.
16 Restrictions on Incurring Liabilities
The Society may receive deposits from its Members and raise
loans for such purposes, for such period, at such rate of interest
and on such terms and conditions as may be decided by the
Committee, subject to the provisions of the Act, the Rules and
Government directives issued from time to time.
Restrictions
on Incurring
Liabilities
as per Rule
15
(i) The Society shall not incur liabilities exceeding the limits
prescribed under Rule 106C-10 of the Maharashtra Co-
operative Societies Rules, 1961.
Accordingly, the total liabilities of the Society shall not, at any
time, exceed ten times the aggregate of—
Statutory
Limit on
Liabilities
as per Rule
106C-10
(a) the paid-up share capital;
(b) the accumulated reserve fund;
(c) the amount contributed by Members towards land and building;
and
(d) the building fund;
after deducting accumulated losses, if any.
14

(ii) Provided that, in case of self-redevelopment of the Society’s
building or buildings, the Society may incur liabilities or
borrow funds up to ten times the value of the land, as
determined by a Government-approved valuer, subject to prior
approval of the General Body and compliance with the
provisions of the Act, Rules and Government directives issued
from time to time.
Special
Provision for
Self-
Redevelopme
nt
(iii) All borrowings, deposits and liabilities shall be placed before
the General Body for its approval and shall be incurred and
utilised strictly in accordance with the provisions of the Act,
the Rules and Government directives.
Approval and
Control by
General Body
17 The Society shall constitute and maintain a Reserve Fund in
accordance with the provisions of Section 66 of the
Maharashtra Co-operative Societies Act, 1960.
Sec. 66
and sec.
154B-18
(a) Constitution of Reserve Fund
The Reserve Fund of the Society shall consist of:
(i) all entrance fees received from Members;
(ii) all transfer fees and transfer premium received on transfer
of shares and interest in the capital or property of the Society;
(iii) amounts appropriated from the net profits or surplus of the
Society in accordance with the provisions of Section 66 of the
Maharashtra Co-operative Societies Act, 1960;
(iv) all donations and contributions received by the Society,
except those specifically earmarked for any particular purpose.
Constitution
of Reserve
Fund
(b) Credit to Reserve Fund
All amounts specified in clause (i) above shall be credited to
and shall form part of the Reserve Fund of the Society.
The Society shall, while finalising the accounts for every Co-
operative Year, transfer to the Reserve Fund such portion of its
net profits as may be prescribed under Section 66 of the Act
and the Rules made thereunder.
Credit to
Reserve Fund
(c) Nature and Accounting of Reserve Fund
The Reserve Fund shall be separately accounted for in the
books of the Society and shall be indivisible.
The Reserve Fund shall be utilised only in accordance with the
provisions of the Act, the Rules and the directions issued by the
competent authority from time to time.
Nature and
Accounting of
Reserve Fund
15

18 In accordance with the provisions of the Act and the Rules, the
Society shall create and maintain such funds as are prescribed
and may create such other funds as may be decided by the
General Body.
Subject to the approval of the General Body, the Society may
establish and maintain the following funds, and shall maintain
the Corpus Fund, namely:—
Creation of
Other Funds
as per Rule
106C-11
(a) The Society shall establish a Sinking Fund.
The Sinking Fund shall consist of contributions collected from
its Members at a rate determined in the General Body Meeting,
subject to a minimum of 0.25 per cent per annum of the
construction cost of each flat, incurred during the building's
construction and certified by the Architect.
The amount so collected shall form part of the Sinking Fundof
the Society and shall be separately accounted for.
The Sinking Fund shall be utilised for heavy repairs, structural
repairs, replacement of major assets, and such other capital
expenditure relating to the buildings or property of the Society,
as approved by the General Body.
Sinking Fund
(b) The Society shall establish a Repair and Maintenance Fund.
The Repair and Maintenance Fund shall consist of
contributions collected from its Members at a rate fixed in the
General Body Meeting, subject to a minimum of 0.75 per cent
per annum of the construction cost of each flat, incurred during
the building's construction and certified by the Architect.
The amount so collected shall form part of the Repair and
Maintenance Fund of the Society and shall be separately
accounted for.
This Fund shall be utilised for routine recurring repairs, day-to-
day maintenance and upkeep of the buildings, common areas
and properties of the Society.
Repair and
Maintenance
Fund.
16

(c) The Society shall establish a Major Repair Fund.
The Major Repair Fund shall consist of contributions collected
from its Members at a rate fixed pro-rata on an area basis, as
and when required, and as decided by the General Body.
The amount so collected shall form part of the Major Repair
Fund of the Society and shall be separately accounted for.
The Major Repair Fund shall be utilised for significant repair,
renovation, restoration, replacement, rehabilitation and
maintenance works relating to the buildings and propertiesof
the Society.
Major Repair
Fund
(d) The Society may establish an Education and Training Fund.
The Education and Training Fund shall consist of contributions
collected from its Members in accordance with the provisions
of the Rules and the rates prescribed by the Government from
time to time.
The amount so collected shall form part of the Education and
Training Fund of the Society and shall be separately accounted
for.
This Fund shall be utilised for co-operative education, training
programmes, seminars, workshops, conferences, publications
and capacity building of Members, Committee Members and
employees of the Society.
Education and
Training Fund
17

(e) The Society shall establish an Election Fund.
The Election Fund shall consist of contributions collected from
its Members.
The Society shall collect contributions equally from all
Members for conducting elections of the Managing Committee,
as decided by the General Body.
The amount so collected shall form part of the Election Fundof
the Society and shall be separately accounted for.
The Election Fund shall be utilised exclusively for meeting the
expenses relating to conduct of elections of the Managing
Committee.
Election Fund
(f) The Society may establish Welfare Fund which may consistof
voluntary contributions collected from its Members.
The Welfare Fund may be used for social, cultural and
recreational activities organised by the Society.
Welfare Fund
(g) The Society may maintain a Corpus Fund.
The Corpus Fund shall consist of contributions received from
the Promoter / Builder, voluntary contributions from Members,
or any other receipts as may be approved by the General Body.
All such receipts shall be credited to and form part of the
Corpus Fund of the Society.
Corpus Fund
(h) The Society may establish any other additional fund for
specific purposes with contributions collected equally from all
Members, subject to the approval of the General Body.
The amount so collected shall form part of such fund and shall
be separately accounted for.
Any Other
Fund
19 Utilisation of Funds
The funds of the Society shall be utilised strictly in accordance
with the provisions of Section 154B-18 and Section 67 of the
Maharashtra Co-operative Societies Act, 1960, read with the
applicable provisions of the Rules and these bye-laws.
No fund of the Society shall be utilised for any purpose other
than that for which it is created, except with the approval of the
General Body and in accordance with the provisions of the Act
and Rules.
Utilisation of
Funds
Section
154B-18
and
Section 67
18

(a) The Reserve Fund of the Society shall be utilised only in
accordance with the provisions of Section 66(2) of the
Maharashtra Co-operative Societies Act, 1960 read with Rule
54 of the Maharashtra Co-operative Societies Rules, 1961.
Accordingly, the Reserve Fund may—
Reserve Fund Section
66(2)
(i) be used in the business of the Society; or
(ii) subject to the provisions of Section 70 & Section 154B-17of
the Act, be invested in the modes prescribed; or
Section 70
& Section
154B-17
(iii) with the previous sanction of the State Government, be utilised
in part for any public purpose likely to promote the objectsof
the Act or for such purposes of the State or local interest;
(iv) No part of the Reserve Fund shall be drawn, pledged or
otherwise utilised except in accordance with the provisionsof
the Act and Rules and, wherever required, with the prior
sanction of the Registrar or competent authority.
(b) The Sinking Fund shall be utilised for structural repairs,
replacement of major components, reconstruction of the
building or such other purposes relating to long-term
sustainability of the building, as may be approved by the
General Body, in accordance with Section 154B-15 read with
Rule 106C-11.
No amount shall be utilised from the Sinking Fund without
prior approval of the General Body.
Utilisation of
Sinking Fund
Section
154B-15
read with
Rule 106C-
11
(c) The Repair and Maintenance Fund shall be utilised for routine
and recurring repairs, maintenance, upkeep and day-to-day
management of the Society’s property, including common
areas and facilities, in accordance with Section 154B-18 read
with Rule 106C-13.
The Managing Committee shall be competent to incur
expenditure from this fund in the ordinary course of
management.
Utilisation of
Repair and
Maintenance
Fund
Section
154B-18
read with
Rule 106C-
13
(d) The Major Repair Fund shall be utilised for substantial repairs,
extensive renovation, replacement of major installations and
other capital nature works, as approved by the General Body,
in accordance with Section 154B-15 read with Rule 106C-11.
No expenditure shall be incurred from this fund without prior
approval of the General Body.
Utilisation of
Major Repair
Fund
Section
154B-15
read with
Rule 106C-
11
19

(e) The Education and Training Fund shall be utilised for co-
operative education and training of Members, office bearers
and employees of the Society in accordance with Section154B-
6 & 154B-28 of the Act read with Rule 106C-7.
Utilisation of
Education and
Training Fund
Section
154B-6 &
154B-28
of the Act
read with
Rule 106C-
7
(f) The Election Fund shall be utilised exclusively for conducting
elections of the Managing Committee in accordance with the
provisions of the Act and Rules governing elections and Rule
106C-11.
Utilisation of
Election Fund
Rule 106C-
11
(g) The Welfare Fund shall be utilised for social, cultural and
welfare activities of the Members as may be approved by the
General Body, in accordance with Section 154B-18 read with
Rule 106C-11.
Utilisation of
Welfare Fund
Section
154B-18
read with
Rule 106C-
11
(h) The Corpus Fund shall be utilised only for such purposes as
may be decided by the General Body in accordance with the
provision to Section 154B-18 of the Act read with Rule 106C-
11.
Utilisation of
Corpus Fund
(i) Any other fund created by the Society shall be utilised strictly
for the specific purpose for which it is created, as approved by
the General Body, and in accordance with the provisionsof
Section 154B-18 and Section 67 of the Act read with
applicable Rules.
Utilisation of
Any Other
Fund
Section
154B-18
and
Section 67
20 Investment of Funds
The Society shall invest or deposit its funds in accordance with
the provisions of Section 70 and Section 154B-17 of the
Maharashtra Co-operative Societies Act, 1960, read with Rule
54 and Rule 55 of the Maharashtra Co-operative Societies
Rules, 1961.
Investment of
Funds
Section 70
and
Section
154B-17
(a) The Society shall invest or deposit its funds in one or moreof
the following modes as provided under the Act:—
(i) in the District Central Co-operative Bank or the State Co-
operative Bank having at least “A” Audit Class in the last three
consecutive years and, where such bank is not available, in any
Nationalised Bank;
(ii) in any of the securities specified in Section 20 of the Indian
Trusts Act, 1882, as permitted under Section 70 and Section
154B-17 of the Act;
Modes of
Investment
Section 70
and
Section
154B-17
(iii) in the shares, security bonds or debentures issued by any other
co-operative society with limited liability;
20

(iv) in any other mode permitted by the Rules or by general or
special order issued by the State Government.
(b) The Reserve Fund shall be invested strictly in accordance with
the provisions of Section 66 read with Section 70 and Section
154B-17 of the Act and Rule 54 of the Rules.
No part of the Reserve Fund shall be drawn, pledged or
otherwise utilised except in accordance with the provisionsof
the Act and Rules and, wherever required, with the prior
sanction of the Registrar.
Investment of
Reserve Fund
Section 66
read with
Section 70
and
Section
154B-17
of the Act
and Rule
54 of the
Rules.
(c) The Society may invest its funds, other than the Reserve Fund,
when not immediately required for its business, in accordance
with the provisions of Section 70 and Section 154B-17 of the
Act read with Rule 55 of the Rules.
Investment of
Other Funds
(d) The Registrar may, by general or special order, specify the
maximum amount or proportion of funds that may be invested
in any class or classes of securities, and may impose such
conditions as may be deemed necessary, in accordance with
Rule 55 of the Rules.
Restrictions
and Directions
by Registrar
Rule 55
(e) Restrictions by Registrar
(f) Where the Society has invested an amount not less than ten per
cent of its working capital in securities, it shall constitute an
Investment Fluctuation Fund as required under Rule 55 of the
Rules, and such portion of the net profits shall be credited to
this fund as may be directed by the Registrar.
Investment
Fluctuation
Fund
(g) Where no bank is eligible as prescribed under Section 70 and
Section 154B-17 of the Act, the Society may invest its funds in
any other mode permitted by the State Government or the
Registrar as authorised under the Act and Rules.
Investment in
Absence of
Eligible Bank
(h) Compliance and Accountability
The Managing Committee shall ensure that—
(i) all investments are made strictly in compliance with the
provisions of the Act and Rules;
(ii) safety and security of funds are ensured; Compliance
and
Accountabilit
y
(iii) liquidity requirements of the Society are maintained; and
21

(iv) details of investments are properly recorded in the books of
accounts and placed before the General Body in the Annual
General Meeting.
CHAPTER VII - MEMBERSHIP, NOMINATION AND
RECORDING OF NOMINATION
PART I -MEMBERSHIP
21 Classes of Members
The membership of the Society shall consist of the following
classes only:—
Sec. 154B-
1(18)
(a) (i) Member
A person admitted as a Member of the Society in accordance
with the provisions of the Act, the Rules and these Bye-laws.
(b) (ii) Joint Member
A person who jointly holds the shares and interest in the
capital/property of the Society together with another Member,
and whose name is entered jointly in the records of the Society
in accordance with the Act, the Rules and these Bye-laws.
(c) (iii) Associate Member Classes of
Members
A person admitted as an Associate Member in accordance with
Section 154B-1(18)(a) of the Act, the Rules and these Bye-
laws.
(d) (iv) Provisional Member
A person admitted as a Provisional Member in accordance with
Section 154B-1(18)(b) of the Act, the Rules and these Bye-
laws.
22 Eligibility for Membership Rule 106C-
4
A person shall be eligible for admission to membership of the
Society only in accordance with the provisions of the Act, the
Rules and these Bye-laws.
(a) (i) No person shall be admitted as a Member of the Society
except a “person” as defined under Section 154B-1(20) of the
Maharashtra Co-operative Societies Act, 1960.
(b) (ii) A minor or a person of unsound mind, inheriting the shares
and interest of a deceased Member in the capital/propertyof
the Society, or becoming entitled thereto under the provisions
of the Act, may be admitted through his guardian or legal
representative, subject to the provisions of the Act, the Rules
and these Bye-laws.
Eligibility for
Membership
22

(c) (iii) Admission of any person to membership, whether by
allotment, transfer, succession, testamentary disposition, family
arrangement or any other mode recognised by law, shall be
subject to compliance with the provisions of the Act, the Rules
and these Bye-laws.
(d) (iv) Where the land or building of the Society is held under
lease, grant or allotment from the Government, Collector,
MHADA, CIDCO, SRA, MMRDA or any other statutory or
planning authority, admission to membership shall also be
subject to compliance with the conditions of such lease, grant,
allotment or applicable statutory provisions.
(e) (v) No person shall be admitted as a Member if such admission
is prohibited under the Act, the Rules, any lawful order of the
Competent Authority or any other law for the time being in
force.
23 Conditions for Admission as Member Rule 106C-
4
No person shall be admitted as a Member, other than an
Associate Member or Provisional Member, of the Society
unless—
(a) (i) an application for membership is made in writing in the
prescribed form provided under these Bye-laws;
(b) (ii) the applicant subscribes to ten fully paid-up shares of the
Society of the face value of ₹50/- each aggregating to ₹500/-,
or such share capital as may be prescribed under the Act, the
Rules or these Bye-laws, and pays the entrance fee of ₹500/-,
as prescribed under these Bye-laws;
(c) (iii) the applicant submits a certified copy of a duly stamped
and registered Agreement for Sale, Conveyance Deed,
Assignment Deed, Gift Deed, Exchange Deed, Partition Deed,
Release or Relinquishment Deed, Family Arrangement,
Probate, Letters of Administration, Succession Certificate,
Court Decree, Sale Certificate or any other document
recognised under law, establishing title or interest in the
flat/unit;
Conditions for
Membership
(d) (iv) the application is approved by the Committee in
accordance with the provisions of the Act, the Rules and these
Bye-laws;
(e) (v) the applicant complies with the provisions of the Act, the
Rules, these Bye-laws and Government directions issued from
time to time;
23

(f) (vi) where the applicant is a body or entity, the application is
accompanied by a resolution authorising such body or entity to
apply for membership of the Society;
(g) (vii) where prior approval or permission of the Government,
Collector, MHADA, CIDCO, SRA, MMRDA or any other
competent authority is required under any law, lease, grant or
allotment, such approval or permission has been obtained
before admission to membership;
(h) (viii) such other conditions, as may be prescribed under the
Act, the Rules and these Bye-laws, are fulfilled.
24 Joint Member
(a) (i) Where the shares, right, title and interest in the flat/unit are
held jointly by two or more persons, they may apply for
admission as Joint Members of the Society in the prescribed
form.
(b) (ii) The person whose name appears first in the registered
document of title and in the Share Certificate shall be deemed
to be the Member of the Society for all purposes under the Act,
the Rules and these Bye-laws.
(c) (iii) The remaining joint holder or holders may be admitted as
Joint Members of the Society.
(d) (iv) A Joint Member shall exercise such rights and discharge
such duties and obligations as are provided under the Act, the
Rules and these Bye-laws.
(e) (v) Unless otherwise provided under the Act, the Rules or these
Bye-laws, any notice or communication served upon the first
holder shall be deemed to have been duly served upon all the
Joint Members.
(f) (vi) On the death, resignation, cessation or transfer of the first
holder, the rights and liabilities of the Joint Member or Joint
Members shall be governed by the provisions of the Act, the
Rules and these Bye-laws relating to transfer of membership
and transfer after death.
25 Associate Member Rule 106C-
5
(a) (i) Any person as defined in Section 154B-1(18)(a) of the Act
may apply for admission as an Associate Member of a Member
in the prescribed form, along with the written recommendation
or consent of such Member.
(b) (ii) An Associate Member may be admitted by the Committee
subject to the provisions of the Act, the Rules and these Bye-
laws.
24

(c) (iii) The recommendation or consent given by the Member may
be revoked by him at any time by giving a written intimation to
the Society, and upon such revocation, the Associate
Membership shall cease.
(d) (iv) An Associate Member shall also cease to be such upon the
resignation, cessation or death of the Member who has
recommended or consented to his admission, or upon the
resignation or death of the Associate Member.
(e) (v) An Associate Member shall exercise only such rights and
discharge such duties as are specifically conferred under the
Act, the Rules and these Bye-laws.
PART II – TRANSFER OF SHARES AND INTEREST
DURING THE LIFETIME OF A MEMBER
26 Transfer of Shares and Interest During the Lifetime of a
Member
existing
provision
and
provision
is made for
transfer on
auction
(a) (i) A Member may transfer his shares and interest in the
capital/property of the Society by—
(i) (a) a duly stamped and registered Agreement for Sale or
Conveyance;
(ii) (b) a duly stamped and registered Gift Deed;
(iii) (c) a duly stamped and registered Exchange Deed;
(iv) (d) a Sale Certificate issued by a Court, Recovery Officer
under the Maharashtra Co-operative Societies Act, 1960, an
Authorised Officer under the Securitisation and Reconstruction
of Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest Act,
2002, a Bank, Financial Institution, Credit Agency or any other
Competent Authority under any law for the time being in force;
or
(v) (e) any other duly stamped and registered instrument or
document recognised under any law for transferring the right,
title and interest in the flat/unit together with the shares and
interest in the Society.
(b) (ii) Every transfer referred to in clause (i) shall be subject to
the provisions of the Act, the Rules, Government directions
and these Bye-laws.
25

(c) (iii) A transfer under clauses (a), (b), (c) and (e) shall be treated
as a voluntary transfer made by the Member.
(d) (iv) A transfer under clause (d) shall be deemed to be a transfer
effected by operation of law or pursuant to statutory recovery
or legal proceedings, and such transfer shall not be invalid
merely because the transferor is unable, unwilling or not
available to execute any application, resignation, declaration,
undertaking or other document ordinarily required for a
voluntary transfer.
27 Conditions and Documents for Transfer existing
provision
(a) (i) Every application for transfer of shares and interest shall be
made in the prescribed form.
(b) (ii) In the case of a voluntary transfer under Bye-law No.
26(iii), the following documents shall ordinarily accompany
the application:—
(i) (a) application by the transferor;
(ii) (b) application for admission to membership by the proposed
transferee;
(iii) (c) resignation of the transferor from membership;
(iv) (d) the original Share Certificate, wherever available;
(v) (e) the duly stamped and registered instrument or document
referred to in Bye-law No. 26;
(vi) (f) proof of payment of the transfer fee, entrance fee and
premium, wherever applicable;
(vii) (g) such declarations, undertakings and other documents as
may be prescribed under the Act, the Rules and these Bye-
laws.
(c) (iii) In the case of a transfer under Bye-law No. 26(iv), the
Committee shall require only such documents as are applicable
to such transfer, and the absence of the transferor’s application,
resignation, consent, declaration, undertaking or the original
Share Certificate shall not, by itself, be a ground for refusing
the transfer.
(d) (iv) Before approving any transfer, the Committee shall satisfy
itself that—
(i) (a) the proposed transfer complies with the provisions of the
Act, the Rules, Government directions and these Bye-laws;
(ii) (b) the transferor had a lawful right, title and interest capableof
being transferred, or that the applicant has lawfully acquired
such right by operation of law;
26

(iii) (c) the proposed transferee is eligible for admission as a
Member;
(iv) (d) the documents produced establish the entitlement of the
applicant to seek transfer;
(v) (e) where required under any law, lease, grant, allotment or
direction of any competent authority, the necessary approval,
permission or No Objection Certificate has been obtained; and
(vi) (f) all other requirements prescribed under the Act, the Rules
and these Bye-laws have been complied with.
Explanation: Nothing contained in this Bye-law shall affect the
first charge of the Society under Section 154B-7 of the Act,
and the rights of the Society to recover its dues in accordance
with the provisions of the Act and other applicable laws shall
remain unaffected.
PART III – TRANSFER OF SHARES AND INTEREST
AFTER THE DEATH OF A MEMBER
28 Nomination
(a) (i) Every Member or Joint Member of the Society may
nominate one or more persons in the prescribed Nomination
Form for the purpose of transfer of the shares and interestof
the deceased Member in accordance with Section 154B-13of
the Act, Rule 106C-8 and these Bye-laws.
Section
154B-13
of the Act,
Rule 106C-
8
(b) (ii) The nomination shall be signed by the Member and
submitted to the Society during his lifetime. Where the shares
and interest are held jointly, each Joint Member may make a
separate nomination in respect of his or her respective share
and interest.
(c) (iii) An Associate Member or a Provisional Member shall not
be entitled to make any nomination.
(d) (iv) A Member may, at any time during his lifetime, revoke or
vary an existing nomination by submitting a fresh Nomination
Form in the prescribed form. Upon recording of such fresh
nomination, the earlier nomination shall stand revoked to the
extent of such revocation or variation.
(e) (v) The Secretary shall acknowledge the receipt of every
nomination, revocation or variation and shall record the same
in the Register of Nominations maintained by the Society in
accordance with Rule 106C-9.
Rule 106C-
9
(f) (vi) No fee shall be charged for recording the first nomination.
A fee of ₹100/- shall be charged for every subsequent
nomination, revocation or variation.
27

(g) (vii) Where more than one nominee is appointed, the Member
may specify the proportion in which the shares and interest
shall devolve upon each nominee. In the absence of such
specification, the nominees shall be deemed to have been
nominated in equal proportion.
(h) (viii) A nomination shall not by itself create or confer any
ownership, title or beneficial interest in the flat/unit or in the
shares and interest of the deceased Member. It shall only entitle
the nominee to seek admission as a Provisional Member and to
represent the estate of the deceased Member in accordance
with Section 154B-13 of the Act, the Rules and these Bye-laws
until the final transfer is effected in favour of the person or
persons legally entitled thereto.
Section
154B-13
and Rule
106C-6
(i) (ix) The rights, title and interest of the deceased Member shall
ultimately devolve in accordance with the applicable
succession law, testamentary disposition, registered family
arrangement or any other legally valid document recognised
under law.
29 Recording of Nomination
(a) (i) Every nomination, revocation or variation received by the
Society shall be placed before the next meeting of the
Committee for taking the same on record.
(b) (ii) The Committee shall record the nomination, revocation or
variation in the minutes of its meeting, and the Secretary shall
make the necessary entries in the Register of Nominations and
such other records of the Society as may be prescribed.
(c) (iii) The acknowledgment issued by the Secretary on receiptof
the nomination, revocation or variation shall be deemed to be
acknowledgment of its recording by the Society.
(d) (iv) The Society shall maintain a separate Register of
Nominations containing the particulars of every valid
nomination, revocation and variation in accordance with Rule
106C-9 of the Rules.
(e) (v) The Society shall not refuse to record a nomination,
revocation or variation if it is submitted in the prescribed form
and is otherwise in accordance with the provisions of the Act,
the Rules and these Bye-laws.
28

(f) (vi) Recording of a nomination by the Society shall not amount
to adjudication of the validity of the nomination or
determination of the rights, title or interest of any person in the
shares, interest or property of the deceased Member.
30 Admission of Provisional Member after Death of a Member Rule 106C-
6 and Sec.
154B-13
(a) (i) Admission of Provisional Member on the Basis of
Nomination
(i) (a) Upon the death of a Member or Joint Member, the nominee
of the deceased Member may apply for admission as a
Provisional Member in the prescribed form together with an
Indemnity Bond indemnifying the Society against any future
claims in respect of the shares and interest of the deceased
Member in the capital/property of the Society.
(ii) (b) Where more than one nominee has been appointed, all such
nominees shall make a joint application. They may, by a joint
Affidavit or Declaration, authorise any one amongst them to be
admitted as the Provisional Member.
(iii) (c) Where the nominees fail to authorise any one amongst them
to be admitted as the Provisional Member, the Committee shall
require them to comply with the provisions of the Act, the
Rules and these Bye-laws before considering the application.
(iv) (d) The Committee shall, after verification of the nomination
and other relevant documents and after making such inquiry as
it deems fit, admit the authorised nominee as a Provisional
Member.
(b) (ii) Admission of Provisional Member where no Nomination
exists
(i) (a) Where a Member dies without making a nomination, or
where no nominee comes forward for admission as a
Provisional Member, the Society shall invite applications from
the legal heirs or legal representatives of the deceased Member
by publishing a notice in at least two local daily newspapers
having wide circulation and by displaying such notice on the
Notice Board of the Society, in the manner prescribed under
the Rules.
29

(ii) (b) The legal heirs or legal representatives claiming the shares
and interest of the deceased Member shall submit an
application in the prescribed form together with an Indemnity
Bond indemnifying the Society against any future claims.
(iii) (c) Where there is more than one legal heir or legal
representative, they may, by a joint Affidavit or Declaration,
authorise any one amongst them to be admitted as the
Provisional Member.
(iv) (d) If the legal heirs or legal representatives fail to arrive at a
consensus, or if any dispute regarding succession exists, the
Committee shall require the production of a Succession
Certificate, Probate, Letters of Administration, Legal Heirship
Certificate or such other document recognised under law before
admitting any person as a Provisional Member.
(v) (e) After considering the applications, claims or objections,if
any, received pursuant to the public notice and after making
such inquiry as it deems fit, the Committee may admit the
authorised legal heir or legal representative as a Provisional
Member.
(c) (iii) Rights and Limitations of a Provisional Member
(i) (a) A Provisional Member shall continue as such until the final
transfer of the shares and interest of the deceased Member is
completed in accordance with the Act, the Rules and theseBye-
laws.
(ii) (b) Admission as a Provisional Member shall not confer any
ownership, title or beneficial interest in the flat/unit or in the
shares and interest of the deceased Member.
(iii) (c) The name of the Provisional Member shall not be entered
on the Share Certificate and no Share Certificate shall be issued
in his name.
(iv) (d) Admission as a Provisional Member shall not affect or
determine the rights, title or interest of the legal heirs or of any
other person claiming through the deceased Member.
(v) (e) A Provisional Member shall be entitled to exercise only
such rights and discharge such obligations as are expressly
provided under the Act, the Rules and these Bye-laws.
31 Transfer on the Basis of Registered Family Arrangement Rule 106C-
6
30

(a) (i) Where, after the death of a Member or any Joint Member,
the legal heirs or legal representatives have entered into a duly
stamped and registered Deed of Family Arrangement
determining the shares, rights, title and interest of the deceased
Member in the flat/unit and the shares and interest in the
capital/property of the Society, they may apply for transfer in
accordance with such Deed.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Bye-law, “Family
Arrangement” means a duly stamped and registered
arrangement or settlement entered into amongst the legal heirs
or legal representatives of the deceased Member for
distribution of the shares, rights, title and interest of the
deceased Member.
(b) (ii) The application shall be made in the prescribed form and
shall be accompanied by—
(i) (a) the original or a certified copy of the duly stamped and
registered Deed of Family Arrangement;
(ii) (b) an Indemnity Bond indemnifying the Society against any
future claims in respect of the shares and interest of the
deceased Member;
(iii) (c) the original Share Certificate, wherever available; and
(iv) (d) such other documents as may be prescribed under the Act,
the Rules and these Bye-laws.
(c) (iii) Upon receipt of the application, the Committee shall
publish a public notice in the manner prescribed under the
Rules inviting claims or objections, if any, from persons
claiming any right, title or interest in the shares and interestof
the deceased Member.
(d) (iv) If no claim or objection is received within the prescribed
period and the Committee is satisfied that the application
complies with the Act, the Rules and these Bye-laws, it may
approve the transfer in accordance with the registered Deedof
Family Arrangement.
(e) (v) Where any claim or objection is received, or where the
Committee is satisfied that a dispute exists regarding the rights
of the legal heirs or the validity or effect of the Deed of Family
Arrangement, the Committee shall not determine such dispute
and shall require the parties to produce appropriate succession
documents or an order of the competent Court before
considering the transfer.
31

(f) (vi) Upon approval of the transfer, the Society shall admit the
transferee as a Member, record the transfer in the Registerof
Members and other statutory records, endorse or issue the
Share Certificate in accordance with the Act, the Rules and
these Bye-laws, and the Provisional Membership, if any, shall
thereupon cease.
32 Transfer on the Basis of Succession Documents Sec. 154B-
13
(a) (i) Where the shares, rights, title and interest of a deceased
Member or Joint Member are to be transferred on the basis of a
Succession Certificate, Legal Heirship Certificate, Probate of a
Will, Letters of Administration, Court Decree or Order, or any
other document recognised under law, the person or persons
entitled thereunder may apply for transfer of the shares and
interest in the prescribed form.
(b) (ii) The application shall be accompanied by—
(i) (a) the original or a certified copy of the Succession Certificate,
Legal Heirship Certificate, Probate, Letters of Administration,
Court Decree, Court Order or other legally recognised
succession document;
(ii) (b) the original Share Certificate, wherever available;
(iii) (c) an Indemnity Bond indemnifying the Society against any
future claims in respect of the shares and interest of the
deceased Member; and
(iv) (d) such other documents as may be prescribed under the Act,
the Rules and these Bye-laws.
(c) (iii) The Committee shall verify the documents produced and
satisfy itself that the applicant is entitled to seek transfer in
accordance with the Act, the Rules and these Bye-laws.
(d) (iv) Where the succession documents clearly determine the
person or persons entitled to the shares and interest of the
deceased Member and there is no legal prohibition or restraint,
the Committee may approve the transfer in favour of such
person or persons.
(e) (v) Where the Society receives any order of a Court or
competent authority restraining the transfer, or where the
succession document itself requires compliance with any
further condition before transfer, the Committee shall keep the
application pending until such order is vacated or the required
compliance is fulfilled.
32

(f) (vi) The Society shall not adjudicate any dispute relating to the
validity, interpretation or legal effect of any succession
document. Any person disputing such document shall obtain
appropriate orders from the competent Court, and the Society
shall act in accordance with such orders.
(g) (vii) Upon approval of the transfer, the Society shall admit the
transferee as a Member, record the transfer in the Registerof
Members and other statutory records, endorse or issue the
Share Certificate in accordance with the Act, the Rules and
these Bye-laws, and the Provisional Membership, if any, shall
thereupon cease.
33 Disposal of Transfer Applications existing
provisions,
process of
disposal of
application
s
(a) (i) The Secretary shall scrutinise every application for transfer
of shares and interest within fifteen days from the date of its
receipt. Where any document, information or compliance is
found deficient, the Secretary shall communicate such
deficiency to the applicant in writing or by electronic means,
specifying the documents, information or compliances
required. Only a complete application together with all
prescribed documents and compliances shall be placed before
the Committee for consideration. No transfer shall be recorded
by the Society unless it complies with the provisions of the
Act, the Rules, Government directions and these Bye-laws.
(b) (ii) The Committee shall consider and decide every complete
application for transfer within thirty days from the date on
which all prescribed documents, information and compliances
are received by the Society. The decision of the Committee
shall be recorded in the minutes of the meeting and shall be
communicated to the applicant within seven days from the date
of such decision.
(c) (iii) Before approving any transfer, the Committee shall satisfy
itself that—
(i) (a) the proposed transfer complies with the provisions of the
Act, the Rules, Government directions and these Bye-laws;
33

(ii) (b) the transferor has a lawful right, title and interest capableof
being transferred, or that the applicant has lawfully acquired
such right by operation of law;
(iii) (c) the transferee is eligible for admission as a Member;
(iv) (d) all prescribed documents, declarations, undertakings, fees
and other requirements under the Act, the Rules and these Bye-
laws have been duly complied with; and
(v) (e) in every transfer other than a transfer consequent upon the
death of a Member, all dues payable to the Society in respectof
the shares and interest and the flat/unit have been paid in
accordance with the provisions of Section 154B-7 of the Act.
Section
154B-7
(d) (iv) In the case of a transfer consequent upon the death of a
Member, the existence of outstanding dues payable by the
deceased Member shall not, by itself, be a ground for refusing
admission of a Provisional Member or refusing transfer of the
shares and interest to the person or persons entitled thereto
under the Act, the Rules and these Bye-laws. Nothing
contained in this clause shall affect the first charge of the
Society under Section 154B-7 of the Act or its right to recover
such dues in accordance with law.
(e) (v) No application for admission to membership or transfer
shall be refused except for non-compliance with the provisions
of the Act, the Rules, these Bye-laws or any lawful order issued
by a competent authority. Every order refusing the application
shall be in writing and shall state the reasons therefor.
(f) (vi) Where the Society fails to communicate its decision within
three months from the date of receipt of the complete
application, the applicant may claim the benefit of deemed
membership under Section 22(2) of the Act. Such claim shall
be subject to an order of the Registrar passed under the Act
after giving an opportunity of hearing to the parties concerned.
Section
22(2)
(g) (vii) Upon approval of the transfer, the Society shall admit the
transferee as a Member, record the transfer in the Registerof
Members and other statutory records, endorse or issue the
Share Certificate, wherever required, and communicate the
admission of the transferee in the prescribed manner.
(h)
CHAPTER VIII. RIGHTS AND DUTIES OF MEMBERS
34

34 Rights of Members
Every Member shall, subject to the provisions of the Act, the
Rules and these Bye-laws, have the right—
Sec. 154B-
10,
Sec.154B-
11 and
existing
provisions
synchronis
ed in
proper way
(a) (i) to hold, occupy and peacefully enjoy the flat/unit together
with the shares and interest in the Society.
(b) (ii) to attend, participate, speak and vote at the General Body
Meetings of the Society in accordance with the Act, the Rules
and these Bye-laws.
(c) (iii) to vote at the election of the Committee and to contest the
election or hold office in the Society, subject to the eligibility,
qualification and disqualification provisions of the Act, the
Rules and these Bye-laws.
(d) (iv) to use the common areas, common facilities, common
amenities and common services of the Society in a lawful and
reasonable manner in accordance with the Act, the Rules and
these Bye-laws.
(e) (v) to inspect the books, registers, records and documents of
the Society and to obtain certified copies thereof on paymentof
the prescribed fees in accordance with Section 154B-8 of the
Act, the Rules and these Bye-laws.
(f) (vi) to receive notices, agenda, minutes of meetings, audited
financial statements, audit reports, annual budget, statementsof
accounts and such other information and documents as are
required to be furnished under the Act, the Rules and theseBye-
laws.
(g) (vii) to submit complaints, suggestions, requisitions,
representations and resolutions before the Committee or the
General Body and to seek redressal of grievances in
accordance with the Act, the Rules and these Bye-laws.
(h) (viii) to nominate, revoke or vary a nomination, appoint or
revoke an Associate Member, transfer the shares and interest in
the Society, mortgage or create a charge over the flat/unit and
the shares and interest, exchange the flat/unit, or otherwise deal
with the flat/unit in accordance with the Act, the Rules and
these Bye-laws.
35

(i) (ix) to sub-let, give the flat/unit on leave and licence basis,
caretaker basis or otherwise part with possession thereof,
without prior permission of the Society where such permission
is not required under law, by giving the prescribed intimation
to the Society and complying with the provisions of the Act,
the Rules and these Bye-laws.
(j) (x) to avail all services, facilities and amenities provided by the
Society without discrimination and subject to the provisionsof
the Act, the Rules and these Bye-laws.
(k) (xi) to participate in the management, administration and
democratic functioning of the Society and to seek enforcement
of the provisions of the Act, the Rules and these Bye-laws
before the competent authority or forum provided under law.
(l) (xii) to inspect the statutory registers, records relating to the
management and affairs of the Society and such other
documents as may be permitted under the Act, the Rules and
these Bye-laws.
(m) (xiii) to exercise such other rights as are conferred upon a
Member under the Act, the Rules, Government directions and
these Bye-laws.
35 Duties of Members
Every Member shall— Sec. 154B-
10,
Sec.154B-
11 and
existing
provisions
synchronis
ed in
proper way
(a) (i) comply with the provisions of the Act, the Rules,
Government directions and these Bye-laws.
(b) (ii) pay all dues, maintenance charges, contributions and other
sums payable to the Society within the prescribed time.
(c) (iii) attend General Body Meetings and participate in the affairs
and democratic management of the Society.
(d) (iv) maintain the flat/unit in good condition and use the
flat/unit only for the purpose permitted under law and these
Bye-laws.
36

(e) (v) use the common areas, common facilities, common
amenities and services in a lawful and reasonable manner and
without causing obstruction, nuisance, inconvenience, damage
or danger to the Society or to any other Member or occupant.
(f) (vi) safeguard the property, assets and interests of the Society
and not commit or permit any act detrimental or prejudicial to
the interests of the Society.
(g) (vii) furnish to the Society such declarations, information and
documents as may be required under the Act, the Rules and
these Bye-laws and promptly intimate any change in
ownership, address, correspondence address, contact details,
occupation of the flat/unit, tenant, licensee, caretaker,
mortgage, transfer or any other particulars required to be
maintained by the Society. Where the flat/unit is sold,
transferred, mortgaged, exchanged, given on leave and licence,
sub-let, entrusted to a caretaker or possession is parted with in
any manner, the Member shall submit the prescribed
particulars and documents in accordance with the Act, the
Rules and these Bye-laws.
(h) (viii) ensure that every family member, tenant, licensee,
caretaker, occupant, employee, servant, contractor, visitor or
any person claiming through the Member complies with the
provisions of the Act, the Rules and these Bye-laws, and the
Member shall remain responsible for any breach thereof.
(i) (ix) permit the authorised representatives of the Society, after
due notice except in cases of emergency, to enter the flat/unit
for inspection, maintenance, repairs, replacement of common
services or compliance with statutory requirements.
(j) (x) comply with the lawful resolutions of the General Body and
the lawful decisions of the Committee passed in accordance
with the Act, the Rules and these Bye-laws.
(k) (xi) cooperate with the Society in matters relating to
maintenance, repairs, structural audit, fire safety, safety
measures, statutory inspections, statutory compliance,
conveyance, redevelopment, disaster management and all other
matters affecting the common interest of the Society.
(l) (xii) perform such other duties and obligations as may be
imposed under the Act, the Rules, Government directions and
these Bye-laws.
37

36 Occupation and Use of Flat/Unit existing
provisions
Every Member shall occupy and use the flat/unit in accordance
with the provisions of the Act, the Rules and these Bye-laws.
(a) (i) A Member may occupy the flat/unit personally or permit its
occupation by the members of his family, Joint Member,
Associate Member, Provisional Member, tenant, licensee,
caretaker or any other person lawfully entitled to occupy the
flat/unit in accordance with the Act, the Rules and these Bye-
laws.
(b) (ii) Every flat/unit shall be used only for the purpose permitted
under the sanctioned building plans, the Occupancy Certificate,
the conditions of lease or allotment, if any, and the applicable
laws.
(c) (iii) No Member shall use or permit the use of the flat/unit for
any purpose prohibited under law or in a manner likely to
cause nuisance, annoyance, inconvenience, damage, hazard or
danger to the Society or to any Member, resident or occupant.
(d) (iv) The Member shall be responsible for ensuring that every
person occupying the flat/unit through or under him complies
with the provisions of the Act, the Rules and these Bye-laws
and shall remain responsible for any breach committed by such
person.
(e) (v) No Member shall part with possession of the flat/unit
except in accordance with the provisions of the Act, the Rules
and these Bye-laws.
(f) (vi) Nothing contained in this Bye-law shall prejudice the right
of a Member to transfer, mortgage, exchange, sub-let, give the
flat/unit on leave and licence or caretaker basis or otherwise
deal with the flat/unit in accordance with the Act, the Rules
and these Bye-laws.
38

37 Inspection of Records and Documents drafted as
per the
Sec. 154B-
8 and
provided
clarity and
also added
charges,
provision
in this part
(a) Every Member shall be entitled to inspect, free of cost, at the
office of the Society during office hours or at such time as may
be fixed by the Society, the documents and records as provided
under Section 154B-8(1) of the Act, which are as follows:—
(i) a copy of the Act, the Rules and these Bye-laws;
(ii) the last audited Balance Sheet of the Society;
(iii) the Profit and Loss Account of the Society;
(iv) the list of Members of the Committee of the Society;
(v) the Register of Members of the Society;
(vi) the Minutes of the General Body Meetings of the Society;
(vii) the Minutes of the Committee Meetings of the Society;
(viii) those portions of the books and records in which the
transactions of that Member with the Society have been
recorded.
Inspection of
Records and
Documents
(ix) The General Body may fix at least one day in each month and
the time for inspection of the records and documents of the
Society by Members.
(b) On the day and during the time so fixed by the General Body,
the Secretary shall make available the records and documents
referred to in clause (i) at the office of the Society or at the
place where such records are maintained, and any Member may
inspect the same without making any separate application.
(c) Where the General Body has not fixed such day and time for
inspection, a Member desiring to inspect any records or
documents shall make an application in writing in Form No.
___, specifying the records or documents required for
inspection.
*
39

(d) In such cases, the Secretary shall, within fifteen days from the
date of receipt of the application, communicate to the Member
the date, time and place at which inspection shall be allowed.
(e) Inspection shall be given at the office of the Society and, where
the Society has no office, at the place where the records are
maintained as decided by the General Body in accordance with
these Bye-laws.
(f) The Secretary shall ensure that all records of the Society are
kept at the place so decided and shall make the same available
for inspection in accordance with this Bye-law.
(g) The Secretary shall maintain a register of inspections,
including applications received, dates fixed and inspections
given.
38 Supply of Copies of Documents
(a) A Member shall be entitled to obtain copies of the documents
and records referred to in Bye-law No. 26, which are made
available for inspection under Section 154B-8(1) of the Act,
and for that purpose shall make an application in writing in
Form No. ___, specifying clearly the documents of which
copies are required.
*
(b) The Secretary shall, within seven days from the date of receipt
of such application, communicate to the Member—
Supply of
Copies of
Documents
*
(i) the amount of fees payable for such copies as provided under
Bye-law No. 28; and
(ii) the details of the mode of payment, including bank account
details and digital payment modes as decided by the Society.
(c) The Society shall furnish copies of the documents from the
date of receipt of fees—
(i) within forty-five days; and
(ii) within thirty days, where the Society is assisted by the
Government in the form of share capital, loan or land.
(d) Copies shall be supplied in physical form or digital form if
available.
(e) The Secretary or authorised person shall be responsible for—
(i) communicating the fees within the prescribed period;
(ii) ensuring supply of copies within the prescribed time limit; and
(iii) maintaining a register of applications received, fees
communicated, payments received and copies supplied.
40

39 Fees for Inspection and Supply of Copies
(a) The fees for obtaining copies of documents and records under
Bye-law No. 27 shall be as prescribed by the Registrar under
Section 154B-8 of the Act.
(b) Until such fees are prescribed by the Registrar, the Member of
the Society requiring copies of documents shall pay copying
fees and other charges at the following rates:—
Fees for
Inspection and
Supply of
Copies
Sr.
No.
Particulars Fees
(1) Certified copy of the Approved Bye-laws of the Society Rs. 5/- per
page
(2) Amendment of the Bye-laws of the Society Rs. 5/- per
page
(3) Last Audited Balance Sheet of the Society Rs. 10/- per
page
(4) Application for Membership of the Society Rs. 25/-
(5) Second and Subsequent Nomination by the Member of the
Society
Rs. 100/-
(6) Share Certificate of the Society (Duplicate) Rs. 100/-
(7) List of Members of the Society Rs. 10/- per
page
(8) Correspondence / Documents (related to Member) Rs. 10/- per
page
(9) Minutes of the General Body Meetings and Committee
Meetings
Rs. 10/- per
page
(11) Copy of Annual Returns and Periodicals Rs. 10/- per
page
(13) Any other document as per Section 154 B-8 of the Act Rs. 5/- per
page
(14) If any document provided in digital form (WhatsApp / email) No charge
(15) If any document provided in digital form on pen drive Charge of pen
drive if pen
drive provided
by the Society
41

Note: A Member shall have the right to inspect records and
obtain copies of documents in accordance with Section 154B-8
of the Act. However, the Society shall not disclose or provide
copies of any confidential, personal or sensitive information
relating to any Member or any other person, such as Aadhaar
Card, PAN Card, Passport, bank account details or any other
information, the disclosure of which is prohibited or restricted
under any law for the time being in force, except where such
disclosure is required by law or by an order of a competent
authority.
as per
digital
privacy
act.
40 Sub-letting, Leave and License existing
provision
(a) A Member who sub-lets his flat or shop or gives it on leave and
licence basis, caretaker basis or parts with possession in any
other lawful manner shall intimate the Society in writing.
Intimation of
sub-letting
Such intimation shall include:—
(i) a copy of the duly stamped and registered leave and licence
agreement or other lawful document; and
(ii) a copy of the police intimation or police verification, wherever
required under applicable law.
41 Restriction on Assignment of Occupancy Rights
(a) No Member shall assign, mortgage or create any charge on his
occupancy rights in the flat without prior permission in writing
of the Society.
Restriction on
Assignment of
Occupancy
Rights
(b) Such permission shall not be required where the assignment,
mortgage or charge is created for obtaining loan or repayment
of loan from:
Exemption of
Permission on
Assignment of
Occupancy
Rights
i. Employer;
ii. Life Insurance Corporation of India;
iii. Bank or Financial Institution;
iv. The Society;
v. Any agency approved by the Government or Commissioner for
Co-operation.
(c) The Member shall, however, intimate the Society of such
transaction and submit necessary documents for record.
42

42 Resignation of Membership existing
provision
(a) Resignation by a Member
A Member, including a Joint Member, if any, may resign from
the membership of the Society by giving three months’ notice
in writing to the Society.
Resignation of
Membership
(b) A Joint Member may resign his membership at any time by
giving notice in writing to the Secretary of the Society through
the Member with whom he holds the shares jointly.
Resignation
by Joint
Member
(c) An Associate Member may resign his membership at any time
by giving notice in writing to the Secretary of the Society.
Resignation
by Associate
Member
(d) A Provisional Member may resign his membership at any time
by giving notice in writing to the Secretary of the Society.
Resignation
by Provisional
Member
43 Conditions for Acceptance of Resignation existing
provision
(a) No resignation of a Member shall be accepted unless all dues
payable to the Society by such Member are paid in full.
(b) Where any dues are found payable, the Secretary shall, within
fifteen days from the date of receipt of the notice of
resignation, communicate to the Member the details of such
dues and call upon the Member to pay the same within thirty
days from the date of such communication.
(c) Where no dues are outstanding or the dues are paid within the
stipulated period, the Committee shall accept the resignation
and the Secretary shall communicate the decision to the
Member within three months from the date of receipt of the
notice of resignation.
Conditions for
Acceptance of
Resignation
(d) Where the resignation is not accepted, the Committee shall
record the reasons and communicate the same to the Member
within three months from the date of receipt of the noticeof
resignation.
CHAPTER IX- MAINTENANCE, REPAIRS,
ALTERATIONS AND OCCUPATION OF FLATS
43

44 Maintenance of Flats and Internal Installations existing
provisions,
grouped in
synchronis
ed way
(a) (i) Every Member shall keep the flat/unit in good condition and
proper repair and shall maintain the same in a clean, safe,
hygienic and tenantable condition.
(b) (ii) Every Member shall, at his own cost, maintain all internal
parts of the flat/unit and all internal fixtures, fittings and
installations therein, except those specifically required to be
maintained by the Society under these Bye-laws.
(c) (iii) Without prejudice to clause (ii), every Member shall, at his
own cost, maintain the following within the flat/unit:—
(i) (a) internal plaster, flooring, tiles, wall finishes, false ceiling
and internal painting;
(ii) (b) internal doors, windows, ventilators, grills, glazing and
glass panes;
(iii) (c) internal electrical wiring, switches, sockets, fixtures, fittings
and appliances beyond the Society’s common supply point;
(iv) (d) internal water pipes, taps, valves, sanitary fittings and
plumbing installations beyond the Society’s common supply
line;
(v) (e) internal drainage pipes, sanitary connections and fixtures
serving exclusively that flat/unit;
(vi) (f) wash basins, sinks, water closets, bathroom fittings, kitchen
fittings and all other sanitary installations;
(vii) (g) internal waterproofing, tile joints, sealants and finishing
works carried out within the flat/unit; and
(viii) (h) such other internal fixtures, fittings and installations
exclusively serving that flat/unit.
(d) (iv) No Member shall do or permit anything in the flat/unit
which may cause leakage, seepage, blockage, damage,
nuisance, inconvenience, vibration, fire hazard or danger to the
building, common areas, common facilities, common services
or any other flat/unit.
44

(e) (v) Every Member shall promptly attend to any defect, damage
or deterioration for which he is responsible and shall cooperate
with the Society in carrying out repairs affecting the building
or common services.
(f) (vi) Every Member shall permit reasonable access to the
Society or its authorised representatives for inspection,
maintenance, repairs, structural audit, replacement of common
services or compliance with statutory requirements in
accordance with these Bye-laws.
45 Repairs and Maintenance to be Carried Out by the Society existing
provisions,
grouped in
synchronis
ed way
(a) (i) Subject to the provisions of the Act, the Rules and theseBye-
laws, the Society shall, at its cost, maintain, repair, renew or
replace the common areas, common facilities, common
amenities, common services and all parts of the building which
are not exclusively allotted to or intended for the exclusive use
of any Member.
(b) (ii) Without prejudice to clause (i), the Society shall be
responsible for the maintenance, repair, renewal or replacement
of the following:—
(i) (a) foundations, columns, beams, slabs, load-bearing walls,
shear walls, retaining walls, structural members and all other
structural components of the building;
(ii) (b) roof slabs, terraces, terrace waterproofing, parapet walls,
chajjas, canopies, sunshades and weather protection structures
forming part of the building;
(iii) (c) external walls, external plaster, external painting, external
cladding, façade treatment and waterproof coating of the
building;
(iv) (d) staircases, lift lobbies, common passages, corridors,
entrance lobbies, foyers and all other common circulation
areas;
(v) (e) lifts, elevators, escalators, lift machinery, lift shafts,
machine rooms, control panels and all lift equipment;
(vi) (f) compound walls, entrance gates, security cabins, internal
roads, driveways, footpaths, kerbs, pavements, gardens,
landscaped areas, children’s play areas and all other common
open spaces;
45

(vii) (g) club house, gymnasium, community hall, swimming pool,
recreation areas and other common amenities provided by the
Society;
(viii) (h) overhead water tanks, underground water tanks, sumps,
borewells, pumps, pressure pumps, hydro-pneumatic systems,
rainwater harvesting systems and all common water storage
and supply installations;
(ix) (i) all common water supply pipelines, rising mains,
distribution pipelines, valves, pumps and fittings up to the
point from where the exclusive internal pipeline serving an
individual flat/unit commences;
(x) (j) all common drainage lines, soil stacks, waste stacks, vent
pipes, rainwater down-take pipes, manholes, chambers, sewer
lines, septic tanks, sewage treatment plants and storm-water
drainage systems up to the point where the exclusive
connection of an individual flat/unit commences;
(xi) (k) the main electrical supply system including transformer,
HT/LT panels, meter room, common distribution boards,
electrical risers, common wiring, earthing system, lightning
protection system, generators, solar power systems, inverters
and all electrical installations up to the common supply pointof
each flat/unit;
(xii) (l) fire prevention, fire detection, fire alarm, fire-fighting,
sprinkler, hydrant, smoke extraction, emergency lighting and
all other statutory fire safety systems;
(xiii) (m) intercom systems, CCTV systems, access control systems,
boom barriers, video door phones, security systems and all
other common electronic installations provided by the Society;
(xiv) (n) common ducts, service shafts, utility shafts, pipe shafts,
electrical shafts and all common service installations passing
through them;
(xv) (o) expansion joints, seismic joints, settlement joints and all
structural movement joints of the building;
(xvi) (p) waterproofing of terraces, podiums, refuge areas and other
common portions of the building;
(xvii) (q) all common parking areas, visitor parking areas, parking
decks and mechanical parking systems, excluding individual
parking equipment installed by a Member;
(xviii) (r) common refuse collection areas, garbage rooms,
composting units and waste management systems;
46

(xix) (s) all common facilities, common amenities and common
services vested in or belonging to the Society under the Act,
the Rules and these Bye-laws;
(xx) (t) such other parts of the building or property as are not
specifically made the responsibility of an individual Member
under these Bye-laws.
(c) (iii) Where any repair involves both the Society’s property and
the internal portion of a flat/unit, the responsibility shall be
determined in accordance with these Bye-laws after inspection
by the Society, and where necessary, on the opinion of an
Architect, Structural Engineer or other technical expert.
(d) (iv) The Society shall carry out routine maintenance,
preventive maintenance and necessary repairs within a
reasonable time after receiving information or becoming aware
of the need for such repairs.
(e) (v) The Society shall maintain proper records of inspections,
technical reports, repairs, replacements and expenditure
incurred in respect of the Society’s property and common
services.
(f) (vi) Nothing contained in this Bye-law shall relieve a Member
from carrying out repairs and maintenance for which the
Member is responsible under these Bye-laws.
46 Repairs and Maintenance to be Carried Out by Members existing
provisions,
grouped in
synchronis
ed way
(a) Every Member shall, at his own cost, maintain, repair, renew
and replace all parts of the flat/unit, fixtures, fittings,
installations and appurtenances which are exclusively serving
or intended for the exclusive use of that flat/unit, except those
specifically required to be maintained by the Society under
these Bye-laws.
(b) Without prejudice to clause (i), every Member shall be
responsible for the maintenance, repair, renewal or replacement
of the following:—
(i) (a) internal plaster, flooring, tiles, marble, granite, wooden
flooring, false ceiling, internal painting, wall finishes and
decorative finishes;
47

(ii) (b) internal doors, door frames, windows, ventilators, grills,
glazing, glass panes, mosquito nets, locking devices and all
other internal joinery;
(iii) (c) internal electrical wiring, switches, sockets, distribution
board, MCBs, RCCBs, electrical fixtures, fittings, appliances
and all electrical installations beyond the Society’s common
supply point;
(iv) (d) internal water pipelines, taps, valves, mixers, plumbing
fittings, geyser connections and all plumbing installations
beyond the Society’s common supply line;
(v) (e) internal drainage pipes, waste water pipes, sanitary
connections and fittings serving exclusively that flat/unit;
(vi) (f) wash basins, sinks, water closets, urinals, bathroom fittings,
shower fittings, kitchen platforms, kitchen fittings, exhaust
systems and all sanitary installations within the flat/unit;
(vii) (g) internal waterproofing, tile joints, sealants, flooring
treatment and finishing works carried out within the flat/unit;
(viii) (h) balconies, flower beds, utility areas, attached terraces and
other exclusive appurtenant areas, including their internal
finishes and fixtures, except structural members and
waterproofing specifically maintained by the Society;
(ix) (i) air-conditioners, outdoor units, exhaust fans, solar water
heaters, water purifiers, satellite dishes, internet equipment, EV
charging equipment and any other equipment exclusively
installed by the Member;
(x) (j) all additions, alterations, fixtures, fittings and improvements
carried out by the Member within the flat/unit;
(xi) (k) all other fixtures, fittings, installations and appurtenances
exclusively serving that flat/unit.
(c) (iii) Every Member shall promptly repair any defect or damage
within the flat/unit which may cause leakage, seepage,
blockage, vibration, fire hazard, nuisance, inconvenience or
damage to the building, common areas, common services or
any other flat/unit.
(d) (iv) No Member shall neglect repairs or maintenance for which
he is responsible so as to endanger the structural stability,
safety, sanitation, fire safety or serviceability of the building or
to adversely affect any other Member or occupant.
48

(e) (v) Where a Member fails to carry out repairs after reasonable
notice and such failure is likely to endanger the building,
common services or any other flat/unit, the Society may carry
out such repairs and recover the actual cost incurred from the
Member as dues of the Society, after giving the Member a
reasonable opportunity of being heard, except in cases of
emergency.
(f) (vi) Nothing contained in this Bye-law shall affect the
responsibility of the Society for repairs and maintenance
specifically assigned to it under these Bye-laws.
⸻
47 Inspection of Flats and Determination of Repair Responsibility existing
provisions,
enhanced
for clarity
(a) (i) Where any complaint is received regarding leakage,
seepage, structural damage, defects, deterioration, malfunction
of common services or any matter relating to maintenance or
repairs, the Committee may inspect or cause the flat/unit and
such other affected flat/unit or common areas to be inspected
for determining the nature, cause and extent of the defect and
the person responsible for carrying out the repairs.
(b) (ii) Every Member and occupant shall permit the Committee or
its authorised representative, after giving reasonable notice,
except in cases of emergency, to enter the flat/unit for carrying
out such inspection.
(c) (iii) Where the Committee considers it necessary, having
regard to the nature or complexity of the dispute or the
technical issues involved, it may appoint an Architect,
Structural Engineer, Licensed Plumber, Electrical Consultant
or any other qualified technical expert to inspect the premises
and submit a report.
(d) (iv) The Committee shall determine, on the basis of the
inspection and, where obtained, the report of the technical
expert, whether the repairs are required to be carried out by the
Society or by the Member in accordance with these Bye-laws.
(e) (v) A copy of the inspection report or technical report,
wherever obtained, shall be made available to the concerned
Member on payment of the prescribed charges, if requested.
49

(f) (vi) Where the Committee determines that the repairs are to be
carried out by the Society, it shall take appropriate steps to
execute such repairs within a reasonable time.
(g) (vii) Where the Committee determines that the repairs are to be
carried out by the Member, it shall issue a written notice
directing the Member to carry out the repairs within the period
specified in the notice.
(h) (viii) If the Member disputes the findings of the Committee,
the Member may submit, within the period specified in the
notice, a report of an independent Architect, Structural
Engineer or other qualified technical expert for consideration
by the Committee before any further action is taken.
(i) (ix) Nothing contained in this Bye-law shall prevent the
Society from taking immediate action without prior notice
where such action is necessary to prevent danger to life or
property or to restore any essential common service.
48 Permission for Repairs, Renovation and Alterations new
provisions
for clarity
(a) A Member may, at his own cost, carry out ordinary internal
repairs, maintenance, replacement or renovation within the
flat/unit without obtaining prior permission of the Society,
provided that such work—
(i) does not affect the structural stability of the building;
(ii) does not affect any common area, common facility, common
amenity or common service;
(iii) does not affect waterproofing, external façade, fire safety
systems, common plumbing, common drainage, common
electrical installations, ventilation or any statutory installation;
(iv) does not cause leakage, seepage, blockage, nuisance, vibration,
excessive noise, inconvenience or damage to any other flat/unit
or to the Society's property; and
(v) is carried out in accordance with the provisions of the Act, the
Rules, these Bye-laws and any other applicable law.
Explanation: Ordinary internal repairs shall ordinarily include—
(i) internal painting, polishing and plaster repairs;
(ii) replacement of flooring, wall tiles or ceiling finishes without
affecting the structural members or waterproofing;
(iii) replacement of sanitary fittings, wash basins, sinks, water
closets and bathroom fittings at the existing location;
50

(iv) replacement of kitchen platform, cabinets and internal fixtures
at the existing location;
(v) replacement of internal doors, windows, ventilators, grills,
glass panes and similar non-structural fixtures;
(vi) replacement of electrical switches, sockets, lights, fans and
internal electrical fittings at the existing points;
(vii) replacement of internal plumbing fittings, taps and valves
without altering the common pipeline or approved layout; and
(viii) such other internal non-structural repairs as do not affect the
building or the rights of other Members.
(b) Where the proposed work involves any structural alteration,
modification of structural members, alteration of the approved
plan or elevation, change affecting common areas, common
facilities, common amenities, common services, waterproofing,
external façade, fire safety systems, utility services or any work
requiring approval under any law, the Member shall obtain the
prior written permission of the Society and such permission or
approval from the competent authority as may be required
before commencing the work.
(c) Every Member intending to carry out any work requiring prior
permission shall submit an application to the Society in the
prescribed form together with such plans, drawings, structural
stability certificate, specifications and other documents as may
be applicable.
(d) Upon receipt of the application, the Committee may, having
regard to the nature of the proposed work, obtain the opinionof
an Architect, Structural Engineer or any other qualified
technical expert for examining whether the proposed work
complies with the provisions of the Act, the Rules, these Bye-
laws and the applicable law.
(e) The Committee shall, after considering the application together
with the opinion of the Architect, Structural Engineer or other
qualified technical expert, as the case may be, communicate its
decision in writing to the Member within thirty days from the
date of receipt of the complete application. Where permission
is refused, the reasons for such refusal shall be recorded in
writing.
(f) Permission shall not be unreasonably withheld where the
proposed work complies with the provisions of the Act, the
Rules, these Bye-laws and the applicable law.
51

(g) Every Member shall be responsible for any damage caused to
the building, common property, common services or any other
flat/unit during the execution of such work and shall, at his
own cost, restore the same to its original condition or
compensate the Society or the affected Member, as the case
may be.
(h) Nothing contained in this Bye-law shall dispense with the
requirement of obtaining any permission, approval or sanction
required under any law for the time being in force.
49 Leakage, Seepage and Waterproofing existing
provisions
enhanced
(a) (i) Every Member shall promptly report to the Society any
leakage, seepage, dampness, water ingress or any other defect
affecting the flat/unit, any other flat/unit or the common areas
of the Society.
(b) (ii) Upon receipt of such complaint, the Committee shall cause
an inspection to be carried out in accordance with Bye-law 45
to ascertain the source, cause and extent of the leakage,
seepage or defect and determine whether the responsibility for
carrying out the repairs lies with the Society or the Member.
(c) (iii) Where the leakage, seepage or defect originates from the
common structure, terrace, podium, external wall, common
water supply system, common drainage system, waterproofing
or any other part for which the Society is responsible under
these Bye-laws, the Society shall carry out the necessary
repairs within a reasonable time.
Leakage,
Seepage and
Waterproofin
g
(d) (iv) Where the leakage, seepage or defect originates from the
internal plumbing, sanitary installations, waterproofing,
flooring, fixtures, fittings or any other part of the flat/unit for
which the Member is responsible under these Bye-laws, the
Member shall carry out the necessary repairs within the period
specified by the Committee.
(e) (v) Where the cause of leakage or seepage cannot be
determined by inspection alone, or where the dispute involves
structural, waterproofing or technical issues, the Committee
may appoint an Architect, Structural Engineer or other
qualified technical expert to determine the source of the defect
and recommend the necessary remedial measures.
52

(f) (vi) Every Member shall provide reasonable access to the
Society, its contractors and technical experts to inspect and
carry out the repairs determined under these Bye-laws.
(g) (vii) Where a Member fails to carry out repairs for which the
Member is responsible within the time specified by the
Committee and such failure results in continuing damage to
another flat/unit or the common property, the Society may,
after giving reasonable notice, carry out such repairs and
recover the actual cost incurred from the Member as duesof
the Society. In cases of emergency, the Society may carry out
the necessary repairs without prior notice to prevent further
damage.
(h) (viii) Where leakage, seepage or damage is attributable to both
the Society and the Member, each shall carry out the repairs
falling within their respective responsibilities under these Bye-
laws.
(i) (ix) The determination of responsibility under this Bye-law
shall not prejudice the right of any person to seek
compensation or any other remedy available under law.
50 Execution of Repairs and Right of Access existing
provisions,
grouped in
synchronis
ed way
(a) (i) Every Member shall permit the Society, its Committee,
employees, contractors, Architects, Structural Engineers,
Licensed Plumbers, Electricians or other authorised
representatives, after giving reasonable notice, except in cases
of emergency, to enter the flat/unit for carrying out inspection,
maintenance, repairs, replacement of common services,
structural audit or compliance with statutory requirements.
(b) (ii) Where the Society is responsible for carrying out the
repairs under these Bye-laws, the Member shall provide all
reasonable cooperation and access required for execution of
such repairs.
(c) (iii) Where a Member is responsible for carrying out the
repairs, the Member shall complete the same within the period
specified by the Committee and shall ensure that such repairs
are carried out in a safe and workmanlike manner without
causing damage or inconvenience to the Society or any other
Member.
Execution of
Repairs and
Right of
Access
53

(d) (iv) If a Member fails to provide access or fails to carry out the
repairs for which the Member is responsible within the time
specified by the Committee, and such failure is likely to
endanger the building, common services, any other flat/unit or
the safety of any person, the Society may, after giving
reasonable notice, carry out the necessary repairs or works and
recover the actual cost incurred from the Member as duesof
the Society.
(e) (v) In cases of emergency involving danger to life or property,
risk of structural damage, fire, flooding, leakage, failure of
essential services or any other urgent situation, the Society may
enter the flat/unit without prior notice, to the extent reasonably
necessary to remove the danger, restore essential services or
prevent further damage.
(f) (vi) The Society shall, while carrying out any work under this
Bye-law, take reasonable care to minimise inconvenience and
damage to the flat/unit and shall restore the affected portion, as
far as reasonably practicable, to its original condition, except
where restoration forms part of the Member’s responsibility
under these Bye-laws.
(g) (vii) The Committee shall maintain a record of all notices
issued, inspections carried out, repairs executed and expenses
incurred under this Bye-law.

51 Hazardous Activities, Nuisance and Improper Use of Flats
(a) (i) No Member or occupant shall use or permit the use of the
flat/unit or any part of the Society’s premises for any unlawful,
hazardous or immoral purpose or in any manner prohibited
under the Act, the Rules, these Bye-laws or any other
applicable law.
existing
provisions,
grouped in
synchronis
ed way
(b) (ii) No Member or occupant shall store or keep in the flat/unit,
common areas or any part of the Society’s premises any
explosive, combustible, inflammable, corrosive, toxic,
hazardous or dangerous substance, except in such quantity and
manner as may be reasonably required for normal domestic use
or as permitted under law.
54

(c) (iii) No Member or occupant shall carry on any activity which
may endanger the structural stability of the building, interfere
with the common services, create fire hazards, cause pollution,
excessive noise, vibration, foul smell, health hazards or
otherwise cause nuisance, inconvenience or danger to any
Member, occupant or neighbouring property.
(d) (iv) No Member or occupant shall obstruct, encroach upon,
damage or misuse any common areas, common facilities,
common amenities or common services of the Society or
prevent their lawful use by other Members or occupants.
Hazardous
Activities,
Nuisance and
Improper Use
of Flats
(e) (v) No Member or occupant shall dispose of garbage, debris,
construction waste, hazardous waste, sewage or any other
material except in the manner prescribed by the Society and the
competent authorities.
(f) (vi) Where the Committee is satisfied that any activity or
condition is likely to cause damage to the building, common
property or adjoining flats/units, or poses a risk to life, health
or safety, it may, after giving reasonable notice, direct the
Member to remove, discontinue or rectify the same within the
time specified in the notice. In cases of emergency, the Society
may take immediate action to remove the danger without prior
notice.
(g) (vii) Where the Member fails to comply with the directions of
the Society within the specified period, the Society may carry
out the necessary work to remove the hazard or rectify the
defect and recover the actual cost incurred from the Member as
dues of the Society, without prejudice to any other action
permissible under the Act, the Rules or any other law.
(h) (viii) Nothing contained in this Bye-law shall restrict the
Society from reporting any violation to the competent authority
or initiating appropriate proceedings under the Act, the Rules
or any other applicable law.
PART- Expulsion of Member
55

52 Grounds for Expulsion of Member existing
provisions
added (g)
as per the
recommen
dations of
Self
redevelop
ment
committee
A Member may be expelled from the Membership of the
Society if such Member—

(a) persistently defaults in payment of dues of the Society;
(b) knowingly furnishes false information or false documents to
the Society;
Grounds for
Expulsion of
Member
(c) uses the flat for illegal or unauthorised purposes on a
continuing basis;
(d) repeatedly commits breaches of the Act, Rules or these Bye-
laws after written notice;
(e) suppresses material facts in relation to Membership or the
property of the Society;
(f) commits any act which materially affects the safety, structure,
functioning or reputation of the Society or its Members.
(g) refuse to vacate the flat in redevelopment after obtainmentof
required approvals as provided in the Development Agreement.
53 Procedure for Expulsion of Member sec.35,
Rule 28
(a) Expulsion shall be carried out strictly in accordance with
section 35 of the Maharashtra Co-operative Societies Act, 1960
and Rules 28 and 29 of the Maharashtra Co-operative Societies
Rules, 1961.
Procedure for
Expulsion of
Member
(b) No Member shall be expelled unless—
(i) a written show cause notice specifying the grounds is issued to
the Member;
(ii) the Member is given not less than 15 days to submit his
explanation;
(iii) the explanation, if any, is considered by the Committee;
(iv) the matter is placed before the General Body Meeting;
56

(v) the resolution is passed by the majority not less than 3/4thof
the member present in the General Body Meeting called for the
said expulsion proceedings and
(vi) the society has to submit the resolution for approval to the
Registrar, and after hearing both the parties, the Registrar will
pass order and that will be the final
(c) A Member shall cease to be a Member of the Society from the
date on which the resolution of expulsion is approved by the
Registering Authority.
Effective Date
of Expulsion
54 Readmission of Expelled Member existing
provisions
(a) A Member who has been expelled shall not be eligible for
readmission to the Membership of the Society for a periodof
one year from the date of expulsion.
(b) The Society may consider readmission before expiry of one
year only if—
Readmission
of Expelled
Member
(i) the General Body passes a resolution recommending such
readmission; and
(ii) prior approval of the Registering Authority is obtained.
(c) Readmission of an expelled Member shall not be claimed as a
matter of right.
55 Cessation of Membership existing
provisions
A person shall cease to be a Member of the Society in the
following circumstances:
(a) on resignation from Membership having been accepted by the
Committee;
Cessation of Membership
(b) on transfer of all his shares and interest in the capital / property
of the Society;
(c) on his death;
(d) on his expulsion from the Membership of the Society;
(e) on being adjudged insolvent or otherwise disqualified under
law from continuing as a Member;
Cessation of
Membership
(f) where his whereabouts are not known for a continuous period
of seven years and no claim is made in respect of his shares and
interest in the property / capital of the Society;
(g) on cessation of his right, title and interest in the property of the
Society by legal attachment, sale or otherwise;
(h) on transfer being found void under the Act, Rules or these Bye-
laws;
57

(i) on cancellation or termination of Membership under the Act,
Rules or these Bye-laws.
The Committee shall take further action in the matter as
required under the relevant provisions of these Bye-laws.
56 Cessation of Provisional Membership and Associate
Membership
as per Rule
106C-5
and 6 and
definition
as per
Sec.154B-
1(18)
(a) A person admitted as a Provisional Member shall cease to be
such Member—
(i) on resignation;
(ii) on death;
(iii) when the legal heir or rightful claimant of the original Member
is admitted as Member and brought on the record of the
Society in accordance with these Bye-laws.
(b) A person admitted as an Associate Member shall cease to be
such Member—
Cessation of
Provisional
Membership
and Associate
Membership
(i) on cessation of Membership of the original Member;
(ii) on transfer of the shares and interest by the original Member;
(iii) on revocation or cancellation of the Associate Membership;
(iv) on withdrawal of consent by the original Member;
(v) on death of the Associate Member;
(vi) on death of the original Member;
(vii) on any other ground provided under the Act, Rules or these
Bye-laws.
57 Record of Cessation of Membership
(a) The Committee shall record the cessation of Membership of a
Member in the minutes of the meeting in which such cessation
is taken on record.
(b) The Secretary shall, within 7 days from the date of such
decision—
Record of
Cessation of
Membership
58

(i) communicate the cessation of Membership in writing to the
Member concerned or to his legal heir or representative, as the
case may be; and
(ii) update all relevant records of the Society, including the register
of Members, share register and other statutory records.
(c) Where cessation is on account of death, transfer or expulsion,
the Secretary shall also initiate consequential action under the
relevant Bye-laws.
58 Limited Liability of Member existing
provisions
and as per
Sec. 154B-
14
The liability of a Member of the Society shall be limited to the
unpaid amount, if any, on the shares held by him in the Society.
Limited
Liability of
Member
59 (a) Liability of Past Member and Estate of Deceased Member existing
provision
(b) The liability of a past Member for the debts of the Society as
they stood on the date of cessation of his Membership shall
continue for a period of two years from the date of such
cessation.
The liability of the estate of a deceased Member for the debts
of the Society as they stood on the date of his death shall
continue for a period of two years from the date of his death
and in accordance with section 33 of the Maharashtra Co-
operative Societies Act, 1960.
Liability of
Past Member
and Estate of
Deceased
Member
Sec. 33
60 Procedure for Receipt, Scrutiny and Disposal of Applications existing
provision
(a) Every application under these Bye-laws shall be submitted to
the Secretary in the prescribed form or in writing, as
applicable.
Procedure for
Receipt,
Scrutiny and
Disposal of
Applications
(b) The Secretary shall acknowledge receipt of every application
on the same day or within 3 days from the date of receipt.
(c) The Secretary shall scrutinize the application within 7 days
from the date of receipt.
59

(d) Where the application is incomplete or any document is
deficient, the Secretary shall communicate the deficiencies in
writing within 7 days from the date of scrutiny, and the
applicant shall comply within 15 days from the date of such
communication.
(e) Upon receipt of a complete application, the Secretary shall
place the same before the next meeting of the Committee or the
General Body, as the case may be, which shall be held within
30 days from the date of receipt of the complete application.
(f) The Committee or the General Body, as the case may be, shall
decide the application within 60 days from the date of receipt
of the complete application.
(g) The Secretary shall communicate the decision to the applicant
within 7 days from the date of such decision.
(h) Where any application is rejected, the reasons for such
rejection shall be recorded in the minutes and communicated in
writing to the applicant.
(i) In case of applications for Membership, if the decision is not
communicated within 3 months from the date of receipt, the
applicant shall be deemed to have been admitted as a Member
in accordance with section 22(2) of the Act.
Sec. 22(2)
(j) The procedure under this Bye-law shall apply uniformly to all
applications under these Bye-laws unless specifically provided
otherwise.
CHAPTER X - LEVY OF CHARGES OF THE SOCIETY
61 Levy of Charges of the Society
The contribution to be collected from the Members of the
Society towards outgoings and establishment of its funds,
hereinafter referred to as “the charges”, shall be in relation to
the following, in accordance with Rule 106C-12:—
Composition
of the Charges
of the Society
Rule 106C-
12
(i) Service Charges;
(ii) Property Taxes;
(iii) Water Charges;
(iv) Expenses on repairs and maintenance of the lifts of the Society,
including charges for running the lifts;
(v) Car Parking Charges;
(vi) Interest on defaulted charges;
(vii) Repayment of installments of loans and interest thereon;
(viii) Non-occupancy Charges;
(ix) Insurance Charges;
60

(x) Lease Rent;
(xi) Non-agricultural Tax if applicable;
(xii) Contribution towards various funds created by the Society;
(xiii) Amenities Charges;
(xiv) Any other charges as may be approved by the General Body at
its meeting, provided that such charges shall not be contrary to
the provisions of the Act, Rules and these Bye-laws.
62 Break-up of Service Charges of the Society
The Service Charges of the Society referred to at Bye-law No.
65(i) above shall include the following:—
Rule 106C-
12
(i) Salaries of the office staff, liftmen, watchmen, malis and any
other employees of the Society;
(ii) Where the Society has an independent office, the property
taxes, electricity charges, water charges and other expenses in
respect of such office;
(iii) Printing, stationery and postage;
(iv) Travelling allowance and conveyance charges to the staff and
the Members of the Committee of the Society;
(v) Sitting fees paid to the Members of the Committee of the
Society, if approved;
(vi) Annual subscription of the Housing Federation and any other
co-operative institution to which the Society is affiliated;
Service
Charges
(vii) Entrance fees for affiliation to the Housing Federation and any
other co-operative institution;
(viii) Audit fees for internal audit, statutory audit, re-audit and test
audit, if any;
(ix) Expenses incurred at meetings of the General Body, the
Committee and sub-committees, if any;
(x) Retainer fees, legal charges, statutory enquiry fees and
professional fees;
(xi) Common electricity charges;
(xii) Any other establishment and administrative expenses approved
by the General Body, provided that such expenses shall not be
contrary to the provisions of the Act, Rules and these Bye-
laws.
63 Sharing of the Society’s Charges by the Members
Committee to fix Society’s Charges in respect of every flat /
unit
Rule 106C-
12
61

(a) The Committee shall apportion the share of each Member or
flat / unit holder towards the charges of the Society, in
accordance with the provisions of the Act, Rules and theseBye-
laws, on the following basis:—
(i) Service Charges:
Equally divided by the number of flats / units.
(ii) Property Taxes:
As fixed by the Local Authority, and in respect of common
areas, on the basis of carpet area of each flat / unit.
(iii) Water Charges:
On the basis of total number and size of inlets / taps provided
in each flat / unit as per the sanctioned building plan.
(iv) Expenses on repairs and maintenance of the lifts of the Society,
including charges for running the lift:
Equally divided by the number of flats / units in the building in
which lift is provided.
(v) Car Parking Charges:
At the rate fixed by the General Body.
(vi) Interest on defaulted charges:
At the rate fixed by the General Body, not exceeding simple
interest at twelve per cent per annum.
(vii) Repayment of installments of loan and interest:
The amount of each installment with interest as fixed by the
financing agency.
(viii) Non-occupancy Charges:
Ten per cent of the Service Charges.
(ix) Insurance Charges:
On the basis of carpet area of each flat / unit:
Provided that, if there is increase in the insurance premium due
to storing any specific goods in any flat / unit used for
commercial purposes, the extra burden of insurance premium
shall be shared by those who are responsible for such increase
in proportion to the carpet area of their respective flats / units.
Sharing of the
Society’s
Charges
(x) Lease Rent:
On the basis of carpet area of each flat / unit.
(xi) Non-agricultural Tax:
On the basis of carpet area of each flat if applicable
62

(xii) Contribution towards funds:
Sinking Fund — at the rate fixed by the General Body, subject
to the minimum prescribed under the Rules and these Bye-
laws;
Repairs and Maintenance Fund — at the rate fixed by the
General Body, subject to the minimum prescribed under the
Rules and these Bye-laws;
Major Repair Fund — on the basis of carpet area of each flat /
unit;
Education and Training Fund — as prescribed under the Act,
Rules and these Bye-laws;
Election Fund — equally by the Members;
Welfare Fund — equally by the Members;
Any Other Fund — equally by the Members.
(xiii) Amenities Charges:
Club house, club membership, gym, swimming pool and
similar amenities equally by the members
(xiv) Playground, garden, jogging track and similar common
amenities:
Equally divided by the number of flats / units.
(b) The Committee shall fix, in respect of every flat / unit, the
Society’s charges on the basis laid down hereinabove and in
accordance with the provisions of the Act, Rules and theseBye-
laws.
64 Payment of the Society’s Charges existing
provisions
and also as
per the
Sec. 154B-
1(12)
(i) The Secretary of the Society shall prepare the bills in respectof
the charges payable by the Members in accordance with the
provisions of the Act, Rules and these Bye-laws.
The Secretary shall issue such bills to all Members within the
billing cycle approved by the General Body Meeting and on or
before the date fixed by the Managing Committee in that
behalf.
Preparation
and Issue of
Bills
(ii) Every bill issued by the Society shall be deemed to be a written
demand or notice of the amount payable by the Member.
Bill to
Constitute
Written
Demand
63

(iii) The General Body Meeting shall determine: Determination
of Billing
Cycle and
Payment
Period
(a) the periodicity or billing cycle for issue of bills; and
(b) the period within which the charges mentioned in the bill
shall be paid (hereinafter referred to as the "payment
period").
(iv) The due date for payment of Society charges shall be as
specified in the bill and shall be in accordance with the
provisions of the Act, Rules and these Bye-laws.
Where the General Body Meeting has not determined the
payment period, the Managing Committee shall allow a period
of fifteen days from the date of service of the bill for payment.
Due Date for
Payment
(v) Every Member shall pay the amount mentioned in the bill in
full within the payment period so fixed.
Failure to pay the amount within the prescribed period shall
render the Member liable for payment of interest and such
other consequences as may be provided under the Act, Rules
and these Bye-laws
Obligation to
Pay Society
Charges
(vi) The Society may serve bills upon Members by hand delivery,
post, courier, electronic mail, digital platform or by any other
mode approved by the General Body Meeting and permitted
under the Act, Rules and these Bye-laws.
The Society shall also display the details of charges or make
them available through electronic means, wherever feasible.
Mode of
Service of
Bills
65 Review of Payment Default Cases of Society Charges Rule 106C-
12
64

(a) A Member shall be treated as having committed default in
payment of the Society’s charges if the amount mentioned in
the bill is not paid within the payment period.
The amounts payable by a Member, flat owner or occupier to
the Society and demanded by issuing a bill or notice in writing
in accordance with the provisions of the Act, Rules and these
Bye-laws shall constitute the dues of the Society.
A Member who fails to pay such dues within three months
from the date of service of the bill or notice or the due dateof
payment, whichever is later, shall be treated as a defaulter.
It shall be the duty of every Member to pay the dues of the
Society within the time as decided by the Society in its General
Body.
The Secretary shall place the cases of such defaults before the
Committee for its consideration and for taking necessary
action.
Review of
Payment
Default Cases
(b) In case a Member, flat owner or occupier continues to remain
in default and becomes a defaulter as stated above, the
Committee shall initiate appropriate recovery proceedings
under the provisions of the Act, including recovery under
section 154B-29.
Recovery
proceeding
66 Interest on Defaulted Charges Rule 106C-
12
A Member, flat owner or occupier who fails to pay the dues
within the payment period shall be liable to pay simple interest
on the outstanding dues from the date immediately following
the expiry of such payment period till its full and final
payment.
The rate of such interest shall be fixed by the General Body,
subject to the maximum 12% simple interest rate per annum.
No interest shall be charged during the payment period.
In case the General Body has not fixed the rate of interest, the
Society shall charge simple interest at the rate of twelve per
cent per annum on the outstanding dues.
Interest on
Defaulted
Charges
CHAPTER XI. INCORPORATION, DUTIES AND
POWERS OF THE SOCIETY
67 Incorporation
65

The registration of the Society shall render it a body corporate
by the name under which it is registered, with perpetual
succession and a common seal, and with power to acquire, hold
and dispose of property, to enter into contracts, to institute and
defend legal proceedings, and to do all such acts and things as
are necessary for the purpose for which it is constituted, in
accordance with the provisions of the Act, Rules and theseBye-
laws.
Incorporation existing
provisions,
Section 36,
68 Common seal
(a) The Common Seal of the Society shall be in the custody of the
Secretary and shall be used only under the authority of a
resolution of the Committee.
Common Seal existing
provisions,
Section 36,
(b) Every instrument to which the Common Seal is affixed on
behalf of the Society shall be signed and attested by any twoof
the Office bearer or one office bearer along with one
committee member as authorised by the Committee in that
behalf, along with their names and designations.
69 Mode of Service of Notices and Communications
(a) (1) Having regard to the importance of the matter and the
specific provisions contained in the Act, Rules and these Bye-
laws, the Society may give notices of General Body Meetings
and communicate resolutions, decisions, circulars and other
communications to Members at their last known address by any
one or more of the following modes:—
Mode of
Service of
Notices and
Communicati
ons
existing
provisions,
(i) (a) hand delivery;
(ii) (b) ordinary post, registered post, speed post or courier service;
(iii) (c) electronic mail (e-mail);
(iv) (d) any other electronic means permitted under law.
(b) (2) A copy of such notice, communication, resolution or
decision shall also be displayed on the Notice Board of the
Society and may, wherever feasible, be circulated through
electronic means.
(c) (3) Upon such display, the notice or communication shall be
deemed to have been duly served.
(d) (4) Non-receipt of any notice or communication by any
Member, or any error in the address of a Member, shall not
invalidate the proceedings of the Society, provided reasonable
steps have been taken for service.
70 Notice Board
66

(b) (1) The Society shall maintain one or more Notice Boards at
conspicuous places in the Society premises.
Notice Board existing
provisions
(c) (2) The Society shall display on such Notice Board all notices,
communications, circulars, statements of accounts, annual
reports, statutory disclosures and such other matters as are
required to be communicated to Members under the Act, Rules
and these Bye-laws.
(d) (3) Where the Society consists of more than one building,
similar Notice Boards shall be maintained in each building,
wherever practicable.
71 The Society shall have a first charge on the shares and/or
interest of a Member, past or present, in the capital and
property of the Society and upon any dividend, bonus or profits
payable to such Member in respect of any dues payable by such
Member to the Society.
Charge and
Set-off in
respect of
Shares and
Interest of a
Member
existing
provision
The Society shall be entitled to set off any amount credited by
or payable to such Member towards the payment of such dues,
in accordance with the provisions of the Act, Rules and these
Bye-laws.
72 A Member, person or firm who has purchased a flat under a
registered agreement as per applicable law, or has acquired
interest in the flat by transfer from an existing Member with
the approval of the Society, shall be deemed to have been
allotted such flat by the Society, subject to the terms and
conditions of such agreement and the provisions of the Act,
Rules and these Bye-laws.
Flat
Purchased
Deemed to be
Allotted
existing
provision
73 Allotment of Flats by the Society (Applicable to Society-
Constructed or Acquired Flats)
(a) Where the Society constructs the building or acquires flats for
allotment to its Members, such allotment shall be made in
accordance with the policy approved by the General Body,
which may provide for:
Policy for
Allotment
(i) first come first served;
(ii) full payment of dues or calls made by the Society;
(iii) allotment by draw of lots;
67

Where allotment is to be made by draw of lots, the Committee
shall prepare identical folded slips, each bearing the numberof
the flat, parking space, garage, premises or other property
proposed to be allotted, and place all such slips in a closed box
or container. The name of each eligible Member shall then be
called one by one, and the Member present, or in his absence a
neutral person present at the meeting or the Chairman, shall
draw one slip from the box. The flat, parking space, garage,
premises or other property bearing the number mentioned on
the slip so drawn shall be deemed to have been allotted to that
Member. The proceedings of the draw shall be conducted in a
fair, transparent and impartial manner and recorded in the
Minutes Book.
allotment by
draw of lots;
(b) Where any Member fails to pay the dues or calls made by the
Society within the period allowed, the Committee may cancel
the allotment made in favour of such Member after giving
reasonable opportunity of being heard.
Upon such cancellation:
Cancellation
of Allotment
(i) the flat may be allotted to another eligible person approved by
the Committee;
(ii) if such Member subsequently clears all dues, the Committee
may consider allotment of any available flat, subject to
availability and policy of the Society.
(c) No Member shall be entitled to possession of the flat allotted to
him unless he has made full payment towards share capital,
cost of construction or acquisition, loan installments, if any,
and all other dues payable to the Society.
Handing over
Possession
74 No Member shall use or permit the use of the flat or unit for
any purpose other than that permitted under the agreement,
sanctioned building plans, occupancy certificate and applicable
laws.
Change of
User
Any change of user shall be subject to compliance with
statutory provisions and shall require prior approvals as under:
(a) The Member shall obtain prior permission, wherever required,
from the competent planning authority or statutory authority.
(b) The Member shall submit a written application to the Society
along with necessary approvals and documents.
68

(c) The Society shall consider such application through the
Committee in accordance with policy, if any, approved by the
General Body, ensuring fairness, transparency and non-
discrimination.
(d) While considering such request, the Society shall have due
regard to:
(i) sanctioned use and applicable regulations;
(ii) structural and fire safety requirements;
(iii) impact on common services and infrastructure;
(iv) likelihood of nuisance or inconvenience to other Members;
(v) compliance with applicable laws.
(e) No permission shall be granted for any use which—
(i) is contrary to sanctioned plans, occupancy certificate or
statutory permissions;
(ii) is in violation of any law, rule, regulation or direction;
(iii) is hazardous, illegal or poses risk to structural stability, fire
safety or health;
(v) is inconsistent with the permitted use of the premises or objects
of the Society.
(f) Any unauthorised change of user shall be treated as breachof
these Bye-laws and the Society shall be entitled to take action
in accordance with the Act, Rules and these Bye-laws.
75 Structural Audit, Fire Audit and Lift Inspection grouped
existing
provisions
for clarity
(a) The Society shall, through its Committee and with the prior
approval of the General Body, appoint a qualified structural
engineer or architect from the panel approved by the competent
authority for carrying out structural audit of the building within
the prescribed time.
Such audit shall be conducted as follows:
(i) for buildings aged between 15 to 30 years – once in five years; Structural
Audit,
69

(ii) for buildings aged more than 30 years – once in three years.
The Committee shall ensure timely appointment and
completion of the audit.
In Municipal Corporation areas, such audit shall be carried out
by empanelled engineers of the concerned authority, and in
other areas by Government-approved engineers or architects.
The report shall be placed before the General Body, and based
on its findings, the General Body shall decide necessary repairs
or measures, which shall be implemented by the Committee.
Records of audit and compliance shall be maintained.
(b) The Society shall undertake periodic fire audit of its property
in accordance with applicable fire safety laws and directionsof
the competent authority to ensure safety of occupants and
adequacy of fire-fighting systems.
The Committee shall ensure timely compliance of deficiencies
and maintain records thereof.
Fire Audit
(c) The Society shall carry out periodic inspection, testing and
maintenance of lifts/elevators in accordance with applicable
laws governing lift safety.
Such inspections shall be conducted to ensure safe operation,
prevent accidents and comply with statutory requirements.
The Committee shall ensure that inspections are carried out
every year by the competent authority and compliance report to
be submitted within prescribed period.
Lift
Inspection and
Maintenance
(d) The Committe shall ensure timely renewal of Insurance
coverage of Society's Property
CHAPTER XIII
PARKING, VEHICLE MANAGEMENT AND
ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING SYSTEMS
70

76 Policy for Allotment, Regulation and Use of Parking Spaces made
changes as
per RERA
Act,
Supreme
court's
orders and
High
Courts
direction
in WP
1580 of
2024 of
EV
charging
(a) (i) The Society shall regulate, allot, manage and control
parking spaces in accordance with the provisions of the Act,
the Rules, these Bye-laws, the approved building plans,
Occupancy Certificate, Deed of Conveyance, registered
documents, applicable real estate laws and the Parking Policy
approved by the General Body.
(b) (ii) The Parking Policy shall provide for classification,
demarcation, allotment, use, charges, waiting list, cancellation,
re-allotment, visitor parking, emergency access,
stack/mechanical parking and such other matters as may be
necessary for orderly management of parking spaces.
(c) (iii) The allotment and use of parking spaces shall be fair,
transparent, equitable and non-discriminatory and shall not
obstruct fire safety, emergency access, common areas, common
services or the lawful use of the Society’s property by other
Members.
(d) (iv) No parking space shall be sold, transferred, assigned,
enclosed or used independently of the flat/unit, except where
such right is expressly recognised under applicable law and
supported by lawful registered documents.
(e) (v) All parking spaces allotted by the Society shall confer only
a right to use such parking space in accordance with these Bye-
laws and the Parking Policy and shall not create any
ownership, tenancy, easement or permanent proprietary right.
71

(vi) Nothing contained in this Chapter shall validate any sale,
allotment or claim in respect of parking spaces which is
contrary to the Act, the Rules, MOFA, RERA, the approved
plans or any judgment of the Supreme Court or High Court
applicable to such parking space.
77 Nature, Classification and Legal Position of Parking Spaces
(a) (i) Parking spaces may consist of open parking spaces, stilt
parking spaces, covered parking spaces, enclosed garages,
stack/mechanical parking spaces or any other parking facility
shown in the approved building plans or recognised under
applicable law.
(b) (ii) Open parking spaces and stilt parking spaces shall
ordinarily form part of the common areas and facilities of the
Society and shall not be treated as independent saleable units.
(c) (iii) In projects governed by RERA or other applicable real
estate laws, covered parking spaces, garages or mechanically
allotted parking spaces specifically identified in the registered
Agreement for Sale or other lawful document may be
recognised by the Society, subject to verification that such
allotment is consistent with the approved plans, Occupancy
Certificate, Deed of Conveyance and applicable law.
(d) (iv) The Society shall not ignore a parking space lawfully
attached, allotted or reserved in favour of a flat/unit under a
registered Agreement for Sale or any other legally valid
document; however, any such claim shall be subject to
verification and shall not be recognised if it is contrary to law.
(e) (v) No Member shall claim ownership, title or permanent right
over any open, stilt or common parking space merely on the
basis of occupation, use, builder’s letter, receipt, possession or
past practice, unless such right is legally recognised and
supported by valid documents.
78 Demarcation, Numbering and Parking Register
(a) (i) The Society shall, as far as practicable, demarcate, mark and
number all parking spaces in accordance with the approved
plans and in a manner consistent with safety, access, fire-
fighting requirements and convenience of Members.
72

(b) (ii) No parking space shall be demarcated or used in a manner
which obstructs access roads, entry or exit points, fire tender
movement, emergency exits, transformer room, electrical
room, pump room, lift lobby, staircase, common passage or any
essential service.
(c) (iii) The Society shall maintain a Parking Register or electronic
record showing the flat/unit number, name of Member, parking
space number, type of parking, vehicle registration number,
date of allotment, cancellation, re-allotment and waiting list
particulars.
(d) (iv) No Member shall alter, enclose, merge, divide, encroach
upon or change the location, dimension or use of any parking
space without written permission of the Society and approval
of the competent authority, wherever required.
79 Eligibility and Allotment of Parking Spaces
(a) (i) Every Member holding a flat/unit in the Society shall be
eligible to apply for allotment of parking space in accordance
with these Bye-laws and the Parking Policy.
(b) (ii) Parking shall ordinarily be allotted to the flat/unit and not
to any particular vehicle.
(c) (iii) Subject to availability, one parking space shall ordinarily
be allotted to one flat/unit in the first instance.
(d) (iv) Where parking spaces are available in excess after
satisfying eligible Members requiring one parking space,
additional parking may be allotted on temporary or yearly basis
as per the Parking Policy approved by the General Body.
(e) (v) The vehicle parked in the allotted parking space need not be
registered in the name of the Member. It may belong to or be
lawfully used by the Member, Joint Member, Associate
Member, Provisional Member, family member, tenant,
licensee, caretaker or any person lawfully occupying or
authorised to use the flat/unit.
(f) (vi) The Member shall intimate the Society in writing or by
electronic means the registration number of the vehicle
proposed to be parked. The Society shall not ordinarily insist
upon the Registration Certificate, insurance policy or
ownership document of the vehicle, unless required by law or
for resolving a specific complaint or dispute.
73

(g) (vii) Where the number of applicants exceeds available parking
spaces, allotment shall be made by a fair and transparent
method such as draw of lots, rotation or any other method
approved by the General Body.
(viii) The eligibility for parking shall cease upon transfer of the
flat/unit or cessation of membership, except where a parking
right is lawfully attached to the flat/unit under registered
documents and recognised under applicable law.
80 Parking Charges
(a) (i) The Society may levy parking charges for the allotment and
use of parking spaces in accordance with the provisions of the
Act, the Rules, Government directions and these Bye-laws.
(b) (ii) The parking charges shall be determined by the General
Body and may vary having regard to the nature, type, location
or size of the parking space, including open parking, stilt
parking, covered parking, garage, stack/mechanical parking or
any other category of parking.
(c) (iii) Parking charges shall be payable by the Member to whom
the parking space is allotted and shall form part of the dues
payable to the Society.
(d) (iv) Where a Member has been allotted more than one parking
space, the General Body may prescribe different parking
charges for the additional parking spaces.
(e) (v) Parking charges shall not confer any ownership, tenancy or
proprietary right in the parking space and shall only entitle the
Member to use the allotted parking space in accordance with
these Bye-laws.
(f) (vi) The Society may recover unpaid parking charges in the
same manner as any other dues recoverable under the Act, the
Rules and these Bye-laws.
(g) (vii) The Committee may suspend the use of an additional
parking space allotted under Bye-law 76(iv) where the Member
defaults in payment of parking charges or breaches the Parking
Policy, after giving the Member a reasonable opportunityof
being heard.
(h) (viii) Nothing contained in this Bye-law shall affect the rightof
the Society to revise parking charges from time to time by a
resolution of the General Body, subject to the provisions of the
Act, the Rules and these Bye-laws.
81 Regulation of Use of Parking Spaces
74

(a) (i) Every Member and occupant shall use the parking space
allotted to the flat/unit only for parking of motor vehicles and
in accordance with the provisions of the Act, the Rules, these
Bye-laws and the Parking Policy of the Society.
(b) (ii) No Member or occupant shall use or permit the use of any
parking space for storage of goods, construction materials,
scrap, furniture, cylinders, inflammable, hazardous or
explosive substances or for any commercial, industrial or other
purpose inconsistent with its use as a parking space.
(c) (iii) No Member or occupant shall park any vehicle in a
manner which obstructs the movement of other vehicles or
pedestrians or blocks any entrance, exit, internal road, fire
tender access, fire-fighting equipment, transformer room,
electrical room, pump room, staircase, lift lobby, common
passage or any other common facility or emergency access.
(d) (iv) No Member or occupant shall encroach upon, enclose,
erect any structure, install shutters, chains, barriers, bollards,
storage cabinets or any permanent or temporary fixture in or
around the allotted parking space without the prior written
permission of the Society and the approval of the competent
authority, wherever required.
(e) (v) Visitor parking spaces, if provided, shall be used
exclusively for visitors and shall not be occupied by Members
on a permanent or regular basis except in accordance with the
Parking Policy of the Society.
(f) (vi) Every Member shall ensure that the vehicle parked in the
allotted parking space is roadworthy and does not cause
leakage of fuel, oil or other substances, excessive noise,
pollution or any nuisance, inconvenience or danger to the
Society or its Members.
(g) (vii) The Society may issue reasonable directions for regulating
the use of parking spaces in the interest of safety, security, fire
protection, traffic management, maintenance and convenience
of Members and occupants, and every Member and occupant
shall comply with such directions.
75

(h) (viii) Where any vehicle is parked in contravention of these
Bye-laws or in a manner causing obstruction, danger or
inconvenience, the Committee may, after giving reasonable
notice where practicable, remove or cause such vehicle to be
removed to a suitable place at the risk and cost of the Member.
In cases of emergency or immediate danger, the Society may
remove the vehicle without prior notice.
(i) (ix) Any damage caused to the Society’s property or to the
property of any Member arising out of the use of a parking
space or parking of a vehicle shall be made good by the
Member responsible, without prejudice to any other action
permissible under the Act, the Rules or these Bye-laws.
82 Surrender, Cancellation and Re-allotment of Parking Spaces
(a) (i) A Member may voluntarily surrender the parking space
allotted to the flat/unit by giving a written intimation to the
Society. Upon such surrender, the Society may re-allot the
parking space in accordance with these Bye-laws and the
Parking Policy.
(b) (ii) The Committee may cancel the allotment of a parking
space where—
(i) (a) the allotment has been obtained by fraud, misrepresentation
or suppression of material facts;
(ii) (b) the parking space is used in contravention of the provisions
of the Act, the Rules, these Bye-laws or the Parking Policy;
(iii) (c) the Member repeatedly violates the lawful directions issued
by the Society regarding the use of the parking space;
(iv) (d) the parking space is required to comply with any order of a
competent authority or any requirement under applicable law;
(v) (e) the Member ceases to be entitled to the parking space under
these Bye-laws.
(c) (iii) No allotment shall be cancelled under clause (ii), except
after giving the Member a reasonable opportunity of being
heard and by recording the reasons for such cancellation in
writing.
76

(d) (iv) Upon transfer of the flat/unit or cessation of membership,
the parking allotment made by the Society shall automatically
stand cancelled, unless the right to the parking space is
lawfully attached to the flat/unit under applicable law and
recognised by the Society in accordance with these Bye-laws.
(e) (v) Every parking space becoming available on account of
surrender, cancellation, transfer or any other reason shall be re-
allotted by the Society in accordance with these Bye-laws and
the Parking Policy.
(f) (vi) Where the number of eligible applicants exceeds the
number of available parking spaces, the Society shall maintain
a waiting list in a fair, transparent and chronological manner,
and every re-allotment shall ordinarily be made from such
waiting list.
(g) (vii) A Member whose parking allotment has been cancelled
shall surrender possession of the parking space within the
period specified by the Committee. Upon failure to do so, the
Society may resume possession of the parking space and take
such further action as may be permissible under the Act, the
Rules and these Bye-laws.
(h) (viii) Cancellation or surrender of a parking space shall not
affect the liability of the Member to pay any outstanding
parking charges or any other dues payable to the Society.
⸻
83 Installation and Use of Electric Vehicle Charging Facilities as per the
guidelines
given by
Chief
Electrical
Inspector,
Industry,
Energy
and
Labour
Departmen
t
77

(a) (i) Every Member shall be entitled to install a private Electric
Vehicle (EV) charging facility for charging an electric vehicle
at the parking space lawfully allotted to or otherwise lawfully
available for use by such Member, subject to the provisionsof
the Act, the Rules, these Bye-laws and the applicable laws,
Government directions and technical standards.
(b) (ii) Installation of a private EV charging facility shall not
require the approval of the General Body. Upon receipt of a
complete application complying with the prescribed
requirements, the Society shall issue the required No Objection
Certificate or permission, wherever required, within the period
prescribed by the Government and shall not withhold or refuse
the same except for reasons relating to non-compliance with
applicable law, safety standards or these Bye-laws.
(c) (iii) Every application shall be accompanied by—
(i) (a) details of the parking space;
(ii) (b) specifications of the charging equipment;
(iii) (c) details of the electrical load and source of supply;
(iv) (d) layout of cabling and electrical installation, wherever
required;
(v) (e) an undertaking to comply with all applicable electrical, fire
safety and statutory requirements; and
(vi) (f) such other information or documents as may be prescribed
by the Government or reasonably required by the Society for
verifying compliance with law.
(d) (iv) The entire cost of electrical load augmentation, dedicated
meter, cabling, charging equipment, installation, civil works,
testing, commissioning, operation, maintenance, repairs,
replacement, electricity consumption, statutory approvals and
removal, wherever required, shall be borne solely by the
Member.
(e) (v) Every installation shall be carried out only through a
licensed electrical contractor using approved equipment and
shall comply with all applicable technical, electrical, structural
and fire safety standards prescribed by law and by the
competent authorities from time to time.
(f) (vi) No installation shall—
(i) (a) obstruct any common area, internal road, fire exit or
emergency access;
(ii) (b) adversely affect the structural stability of the building;
78

(iii) (c) interfere with common electrical installations or essential
services;
(iv) (d) create any electrical, fire or public safety hazard; or
(v) (e) cause nuisance, inconvenience or damage to the Society or
any Member.
(g) (vii) The Society may, after reasonable notice, inspect the
installation only for the purpose of verifying compliance with
applicable safety standards and these Bye-laws. The Member
shall promptly rectify any defect or unsafe condition pointed
out by the Society or any competent authority.
(h) (viii) Where the installation poses an immediate danger to life
or property, or where the Member fails to rectify any material
defect within the time specified after notice, the Society may
suspend or disconnect the charging facility by a reasoned order,
without prejudice to any other action permissible under law.
(i) (ix) The Society may establish common EV charging
infrastructure for the benefit of Members and may recover
electricity charges, user charges and maintenance charges in
accordance with the Act, the Rules, these Bye-laws and
Government directions.
(j) (x) The Society shall not be liable for any loss, damage,
malfunction, fire, theft, accident or electrical fault arising from
any private EV charging installation except to the extent such
loss is directly attributable to the negligence or wilful act of the
Society.
(k) (xi) Every Member installing a private EV charging facility
shall indemnify and keep indemnified the Society against all
claims, losses, liabilities, damages, costs and expenses arising
out of such installation or its use.
(l) (xii) The Committee may prescribe standard application forms,
technical checklists and operating procedures consistent with
the Act, the Rules, these Bye-laws and Government directions,
but shall not impose any condition which is inconsistent with
or more restrictive than the applicable law or Government
directions.
CHAPTER XII. GENERAL BODY MEETING
79

84 General Body is a Supreme Authority as per the
Section 75,
76, Rules
106C-13
as well as
Rule 59,
60, 61, 62,
63
(a) The General Body shall be the supreme authority of the Society
and its decisions shall be binding on the Committee and all
Members, subject to the provisions of the Act, Rules and these
Bye-laws.
General Body
is a Supreme
Authority
(b) The General Body shall exercise all powers and perform all
functions as conferred under the Act, Rules, Bye-laws and
directions issued by the competent authority from time to time.
85 First General Body Meeting
(a) The First General Body Meeting of the promoters who have
signed the application for registration of the Society shall be
held within a period of three months from the date of
registration of the Society, as provided under the Rules.
First General Body Meeting
First General
Body Meeting
(b) It shall be the responsibility of the Chief Promoter to convene
the First General Body Meeting within the stipulated period.
86 If the Chief Promoter fails to convene the First General Body
Meeting within the prescribed period, the Registering
Authority shall cause such meeting to be convened through an
authorised officer.
Failure to
Convene First
General Body
Meeting
87 Notice of First General Body Meeting
(a) A clear fourteen days’ notice of the First General Body
Meeting shall be given to all promoters who have signed the
application for registration of the Society.
Notice of First General Body Meeting
Notice of First
General Body
Meeting
(b) Such notice shall be issued by the Chief Promoter or, as the
case may be, by the Officer authorised by the Registering
Authority.
88 Business of the First General Body Meeting
80

(a) The following business shall be transacted at the First General
Body Meeting:—
Business of
the First
General Body
Meeting
i. Election of a Chairperson for the meeting;
ii. Admission of new Members, other than the promoters, who
have applied for membership;
iii. Consideration and approval of the Statement of Accounts
prepared by the Chief Promoter as on a date not earlier than
fourteen days prior to the meeting;
iv. Constitution of a Provisional Committee until regular elections
are held;
v. Fixing the limit up to which funds may be borrowed;
vi. Authorising the Committee to take steps for conveyance of
right, title and interest in the property in the name of the
Society;
vii. Appointment of Internal Auditor, if required, and fixation of
remuneration;
viii. Authorising a Member of the Provisional Committee to
convene the first meeting of the Committee;
ix. Consideration of affiliation of the Society to the District
Housing Federation or other institutions;
x. Any other matter with the permission of the Chair, not
requiring special notice.
89 Constitution of Provisional Committee
(a) The Provisional Committee shall be constituted at the First
General Body Meeting.
Constitution of Provisional Committee
Constitution
of Provisional
Committee
(b) The Provisional Committee shall exercise all powers and
perform all functions of a duly elected Committee under the
Act, Rules and Bye-laws.
90 The person presiding over the First General Body Meeting
shall:

(a) Record the minutes of the meeting; Recording of
Minutes
(b) Sign the minutes;
(c) Hand over the same to the Secretary elected at the first meeting
of the Provisional Committee or nominated by the Registering
Authority.
91 Handover of Records by Chief Promoter
81

(a) The Chief Promoter shall, immediately after election or
nomination of the Provisional Committee, hand over all
records and assets of the Society to the Chairman or authorised
Member of the Committee.
Handover of
Records by
Chief
Promoter
(b) The records shall include, but not be limited to:
i. Application for registration and related documents;
ii. Registered Bye-laws of the Society;
iii. Certificate of Registration;
iv. Bank documents, passbooks, cheque books and financial
records;
v. Agreements executed with various parties;
vi. Statement of Accounts;
vii. Membership applications and records;
viii. Vouchers and financial documents;
ix. Cash balance, if any;
x. Plans and construction-related documents, if applicable;
xi. Minutes of the First General Body Meeting;
xii. Correspondence files;
xiii. All other records and assets of the Society in physical or digital
form.
(c) The Chief Promoter shall prepare and submit a handover
report, and shall not retain any records or assets of the Society.
92 Powers of Provisional Committee
The Provisional Committee or nominated Committee shall
have all powers and functions of a Committee duly elected
under the Act, Rules and Bye-laws.
Powers of
Provisional
Committee
93
The Provisional Committee or nominated Committee shall hold
office for a period of one year or until the regular Committee is
elected, whichever is earlier.
Term of
Provisional
Committee
94 The Chairman of the Provisional Committee or nominated
Committee shall hand over charge of all records, assets and
documents of the Society to the Chairman of the newly elected
Committee at its first meeting, leaving nothing with him.
Handover by
Provisional
Committee
95 Annual General Body Meeting (AGM)
(a) The Society shall hold its Annual General Body Meeting
within six months from the close of the financial year, i.e., on
or before 30th September of every year, as mandated under
Section 75 of the Act.
82

(b) It shall be the statutory responsibility of the Committee to
ensure that the Annual General Body Meeting is convened
within the prescribed period.
Annual
General Body
Meeting
(c) At every Annual General Body Meeting, the Committee shall
place before the Society for the approval:
(i) The Minutes of the previous Annual General Body / Special
General Body (if any).
(ii) Annual Report of the Society;
(iii) Audited Financial Statements;
(iv) Audit Report of the preceding financial year;
The appointment of an Auditor or Auditing Firm from the
panel of the Auditor maintained by the Registrar.
(v) Rectification Report on earlier audit;
(vi) Budget for the ensuing financial year;
(vii) Plan for disposal of surplus;
(viii) Details of loans, if any, given to Members or specified persons;
(ix) Amendments of Bye-laws, if any;
(x) The initiation of Election Process of the Committee if due in
the ensuing Financial Year;
(xi) Any other business with the permission of the Chair.
(d) Where the Society fails to call the Annual General Body
Meeting within the period specified in clause (a):
(i) the Registrar or any officer authorised by him shall have the
power to call such meeting;
(ii) such meeting shall be deemed to be a validly convened Annual
General Body Meeting of the Society;
(iii) the expenditure incurred for convening such meeting shall be
recoverable from the funds of the Society or from the persons
responsible for such failure, as determined by the Registrar;
(iv) the Registrar may, after giving opportunity of being heard,
declare the officer or Member of the Committee responsible for
such default as disqualified for being elected or for being a
Member of the Committee for a period not exceeding five
years;
96 Special General Body Meeting (SGM)
(a) A Special General Body Meeting may be called at any time:
(i) by the Chairman;
(ii) by a majority of the Committee;
(iii) upon requisition in writing by 1/5th Members as provided
under Section 76 of the Act;
83

(iv) at the instance of the Registrar.
(v) at the instance of the federal society of which the society is a
member
(b) It shall be the responsibility of the Committee to convene such
meeting within one month in case of requisition from the
members as per Section 76 of the Act.
Special
General Body
Meeting
(c) Where the Committee fails to convene the Special General
Body Meeting within such period:
(i) the Registrar or any person authorised by him shall have the
power to convene such meeting;
(ii) such meeting shall be deemed to be duly convened by the
Committee;
(iii) the Registrar may direct that the expenditure incurred for such
meeting shall be paid from the funds of the Society or
recovered from the persons responsible for failure to convene
the meeting;
(iv) the Registrar may, after giving an opportunity of being heard,
declare such officer or Member of the Committee disqualified
for a period not exceeding five years and may impose penalty
as provided under the Act.
97 Notice of General Body Meeting
(a) Every General Body Meeting shall be convened by giving clear
notice in accordance with the provisions of the Act, Rules and
these Bye-laws.
i For the Annual General Body meetings Clear 14 days notice is
mandatory i.e the day of the notice and the day of the meeting
shall be excluded.
ii For the Special General Body meetings Clear 5 days notice is
mandatory i.e the day of the notice and the day of the meeting
shall be excluded.
iii For the Special General Body meeting in case of any
Emergency, the meeting may be called even at a shorter notice.
The agenda of such emergency meeting and the reason of such
emergency shall be communicated in writing to all the
members. Also the decision of such meeting shall be
communicated in writing to all the members with 2 daysof
such meeting.
(b) The notice shall mandatorily specify:
(i) date, time and place of the meeting; Notice of
General Body
Meeting
84

(ii) detailed agenda of the meeting;
(iii) mode of participation, where applicable. If the meeting is
conducted through Online mode then the link of the said
meeting shall be shared in the Notice;
(c) No business shall be transacted at any General Body Meeting
unless it is included in the agenda, except with the permission
of the Chair and with the consent of the Members present.
98 Presiding Officer of Meeting
(a) The Chairman shall preside over the General Body Meeting.
Presiding Officer of Meeting
Presiding
Officer of
Meeting
(b) In the absence of the Chairman, the Members present shall
elect one among themselves to preside over the meeting.
99 Quorum
(a) No General Body Meeting shall be held or proceeded with
unless the quorum of 20 members or 2/3rd whichever is less is
present.
(b) No Proxy or holder of Power of Attorney or letter of Authority
shall be eligible to attend a General Body Meeting of the
society on behalf of member of the society.
(c) If within half an hour from the time appointed for the meeting
the quorum is not present:
(i) in case of a meeting convened upon requisition of Members,
the meeting shall stand dissolved;
Quorum
(ii) in any other case, the meeting shall stand adjourned to a later
time on the same day or to a subsequent date not earlier than
seven days and not later than thirty days, as specified in the
notice. At such adjourned meeting, the business on the agenda
of the original meeting shall be transacted, whether quorum is
present or not.
100 Conduct of Business
(a) The Secretary or the officer convening the meeting shall read
the notice of the meeting and the agenda before
commencement of the business.
Conduct of
Business
(b) The business shall be transacted in the order in which it
appears in the agenda, unless the Members present, with the
permission of the Chair, agree to change the order.
(c) Except where otherwise provided under the Act, Rules, all
resolutions shall be passed by a majority of the Members
present.
(d) In case of equality of votes, the Chairman of the meeting shall
have a casting vote.
85

101 Voting
(a) Voting shall ordinarily be by show of hands. Voting
(b) Where Members are divided on any resolution, any Member
may demand a poll, and upon such demand, the Chairmanof
the meeting shall put the resolution to vote.
(c) Voting may be conducted by ballot where so directed by the
Chairman of the meeting or required under the Act or Rules .
(d) The result of voting shall be declared by the Chairman of the
meeting and shall be final and binding, and shall be recorded in
the minutes.
102 Postponement and Adjournment
(a) If all the business on the agenda cannot be transacted on the
date of the meeting, the meeting may be postponed to a suitable
date not later than thirty days.
Postponement
and
Adjournment
(b) The remaining business shall be transacted at such postponed
meeting.
103 No resolution regarding:
(i) expulsion of a Member; Restriction on
Certain
Resolutions
(ii) removal of a Member of the Committee;
(iii) amendment of Bye-laws;
shall be brought before any General Body Meeting unless due
notice thereof has been given strictly in accordance with the
provisions of the Act, Rules .
CHAPTER XIII. MANAGEMENT OF THE AFFAIRS
OF THE SOCIETY
104 Final Authority of the Society as per
existing
provisions,
Election
Rules,
Rule 106C-
13
(a) Subject to the provisions of the Act, the Rules and these Bye-
laws, the final authority of the Society shall vest in the General
Body of Members duly convened and constituted in accordance
with these Bye-laws.
Final
Authority of
the Society

86

(b) The General Body shall exercise such powers and perform
such functions as are conferred upon it under the Act, the Rules
and these Bye-laws, and shall decide all matters relating to the
policy, finance, and administration of the Society.
105 Governance Framework of the Society
(a) In consonance with Rule 106C-13(1)(a) of the Rules, the
management and administration of the Society shall be
governed by the Bye-laws of the Society as approved by the
Registrar.
Governance
Framework of
the Society
(b) Such Bye-laws shall constitute the fundamental governance
framework of the Society, and all decisions, actions, and
functions of the Society shall be carried out strictly in
accordance therewith.
106 Management of the Society to Vest in the Committee
(a) The management of the affairs of the Society shall vest in the
Committee duly constituted in accordance with the provisions
of the Act, Rules, and these bye-laws.
Management
of the Society
to Vest in the
Committee
(b) The Committee shall be the executive body of the Society and
shall carry on the day-to-day administration of the Society,
subject to the provisions of the Act, Rules and bye-laws and the
directions of the General Body.
In terms of Rule 106C-13(2)(a), the Committee shall execute
the decisions taken by the General Body, prepare the annual
budget, maintain financial records, and ensure timely audit,
repairs and maintenance of the Society’s property.
107 Exercise of Powers and Duties of the Committee
(a) Subject to the directions given or regulations made by the
General Body, the Committee shall exercise all powers
conferred on it and discharge all functions entrusted to it under
these bye-laws. The Committee shall act as the executive
authority of the Society and shall function in a fiduciary
capacity in the interest of the Society and its members.
(b) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing, the
Committee shall—
Exercise of
Powers and
Duties of the
Committee
(i) Manage and administer the affairs of the Society and maintain,
protect and preserve its property, assets and infrastructure;
87

(ii) Maintain true, correct and up-to-date books of accounts,
statutory registers, records and documents and ensure their
proper custody and preservation;
(iii) Ensure timely assessment, demand, collection and recovery of
dues from members and ensure proper, transparent and lawful
utilisation of the funds of the Society;
(iv) Place before the General Body all matters requiring its
approval, including annual accounts, budgets, reports, major
decisions and proposals involving financial or administrative
implications;
(v) Ensure compliance with all statutory provisions, directions of
competent authorities and these bye-laws;
(vi) Implement and give effect to all lawful resolutions of the
General Body within a reasonable time;
(vii) Ensure proper maintenance, repairs, structural safety, insurance
and statutory compliances relating to the property of the
Society;
(viii) Represent the Society in all legal, administrative and statutory
proceedings and take appropriate action for protection of its
rights and interests;
(b) Maintain transparency in its functioning and provide access to
records and information to members as permissible under law.
The Committee may, with prior approval of the General Body,
appoint qualified professionals including architects, structural
engineers, contractors, legal advisors, Project Management
Consultants (PMC), auditors and other experts, as may be
necessary for proper management, maintenance, redevelopment
or compliance of the Society.
The Committee shall function strictly in accordance with these
bye-laws - Provided that
(c) The Committee shall not exercise any power or take any
decision in respect of matters which are required to be decided
by the General Body;
Functions of
the Committe
(d) Any act, decision or omission of the Committee in
contravention of statutory provisions, directions of competent
authority or these bye-laws shall render the Committee and its
members liable for action as per law;
(e) The Committee shall be jointly and severally responsible for all
decisions, acts and omissions affecting the affairs of the
Society;
88

(f) The Committee shall act as trustees of the Society and
discharge its duties with due diligence, good faith, transparency
and accountability.
108 Opening of Bank Account and Investment of Funds
(a) The Society shall open and maintain one or more bank
accounts in a State Co-operative Bank, District Central Co-
operative Bank, or in any other banking institution or mode
permitted by the State Government, in accordance with the
provisions of Section 70 and Section 154B-17 of the
Maharashtra Co-operative Societies Act, 1960.
Opening of
Bank Account
(b) The bank account of the Society shall be operated jointly by
the Secretary together with the Chairman or the Treasurer, or
by such other Office Bearer as may be authorised by the
Managing Committee.
All receipts, payments, withdrawals, cheques, electronic
transactions, acknowledgements and discharges on behalf of
the Society shall be jointly signed, authenticated or authorised
by the persons so authorised.
Operation of
Bank Account
(c) The Managing Committee shall ensure that all financial
transactions, accounting, maintenance of books of accounts and
audit of the Society are carried out strictly in accordance with
the provisions of the Act, the Rules and these Bye-laws and in
terms of Rule 106C-13(2)(a).
Financial
Management
and
Accounting
(d) The Society may invest or deposit its funds in accordance with
the provisions of Section 70 and Section 154B-17 of the Act
and in accordance with the directions or guidelines issued by
the competent authority from time to time.
Investment of
Funds
(e) The Managing Committee shall be responsible for ensuring
safe custody of the funds of the Society and for ensuring that
the funds are utilised and invested only for the purposes
authorised under the Act, the Rules and these Bye-laws.
Responsibility
of the
Managing
Committee
109 Strength of the Managing Committee
(a) The Committee shall consist of 7, 11, 13, 15, 17 or 19
Members of the Society, depending upon the total numberof
members of the Society.
(b) The strength of the Committee shall include reserved seats as
provided under Sections 154B-20 and 154B-21 of the
Maharashtra Co-operative Societies Act, 1960, subject to
applicability.
Reserved
Seats
89

(c) In case of societies having up to 50 members, only the
reservation for women shall be applicable and no other
reservation shall apply.
Non
application of
reserved seats
(d) The strength of the Committee and the quorum for the
Committee meeting shall be as follows:
No. of Members of the Society General
Seats Women SC/ST OBC VJ/NT/SBC Total
Committee StrengthQuorum
Up to 5052———73
Up to 10062111116
101 to 20082111137
201 to 300102111158
301 to 500122111179
500 and above1421111910
Strength of
committee
(e) Till the time the members of the reserved categories are not
available or elected to fill the reserve seats as provided in
Section 154B-20 and 154B-21 such reserved seats shall not be
counted for strength of managing committee for compositionof
quorum. The quorum of the managing committee meetings
shall be simple majority provided
Quorum
(a) The quorum for a meeting of the Managing Committee
shall be a simple majority of the total number of elected
members constituting the Committee immediately after its
electio
(b) In the case of a Society having fifty or less members, the
quorum for a meeting of the Managing Committee shall be
three elected members.
(c) The quorum once determined shall remain unchanged
during the tenure of the Committee and shall not be reduced on
account of resignation, death, disqualification, removal,
cessation or any vacancy in the Committee.
110 Election of the Committee
(a) The election of all the Members of the Committee shall be held
once in every five years, before the expiry of its term, in
accordance with the provisions of Section 73CB of the
Maharashtra Co-operative Societies Act, 1960 and the Rules
and procedure framed thereunder.
90

(b) It shall be the duty of the Committee to conduct the electionof
the Society where the number of members is 250 or less, in
accordance with the procedure prescribed for ‘E’ Type
Societies under Rules 76A to 76R.
In the case of societies having more than 250 members, the
Committee shall intimate the State Co-operative Election
Authority before Six months of the expiry of its term and
submit information in Form E1, E2 and E3 for conducting the
election.
If the Committee fails to take necessary steps for conducting
the election before expiry of its term, the Members of the
Committee shall cease to hold office on expiry of the term and
action shall be taken by the Registrar under Section 77A of the
Act.
Election of
the
Committee
111 Prohibition against being interested in the Society
No officer of the Society shall have any interest, directly or
indirectly, otherwise than as such officer—
(a) in any contract entered into with the Society; Prohibition
against being
interested in
the Society
(b) in any property sold or purchased by the Society;
(c) in any other transaction of the Society.
Provided that, nothing contained herein shall apply to any
investment made in, or loan taken from, the Society by any
paid employee of the Society for the purpose of providing
residential accommodation, in accordance with the provisions
of the Act, the Rules and these bye-laws.
112 Disqualification for Membership of the Committee
No person shall be a member of the Commmitte or eligible for
being elected as a Member of the Committee or co-opted on it,
if—
(a) he / she is a defaulter of any dues payable to any Society
registered under the provisions of the Act, and has failed to pay
such dues within three months from the date of service of
notice in writing, served either by hand delivery or by
registered post or Speed Post demanding the payment of dues;
Disqualificati
on for
Membership
of the
Committee
91

(b) he / she has been convicted of an offence involving moral
turpitude, unless a period of six years has elapsed since such
conviction; or is convicted with imprisonment of not less than
one year for an offence under the provisions of any law for the
time being in force;
(c) he / she has been held responsible under Sections 75(5), 78, 79,
88, 147, 154B-8(2) or 154B-27 of the Act, or has been held
responsible for the payment of costs of inquiry under Section
85 of the Act;
(d) he / she has directly or indirectly carried on the business of
buying, selling, letting or subletting of flats in the Society, or is
engaged in any activity of a commercial nature in respectof
flats in the Society;
(e) he / she has incurred any disqualification under the provisions
of the Act or the Rules made thereunder, including
disqualification under Section 154B-23 and clauses (vii), (viii)
or (ix) of clause (f) of sub-section (1) of Section 73CA of the
Act, including the provision relating to having more than two
children after the 7th September, 2002;
(f) he / she has, without previous permission in writing of (to )the
Society, sublet his / her flat or part thereof, or given it on leave
and license or caretaker basis, or parted with possession in any
other manner;
(g) he / she has remained absent for three consecutive meetings of
the Committee without leave of absence granted by the
Committee;
(h) he / she has failed to comply with statutory provisions,
directions of competent authorities, or lawful resolutions of the
Society, resulting in governance default or statutory non-
compliance.
113 Constitution of the Committee
(a) In a General Election of Members of the Committee of the
Society, on the election of two-thirds or more number of
Members of the total strength of the Committee as prescribed
under Section 154B-19 of the Act, the Returning Officer or any
other officer or authority conducting such election shall, within
two days after the declaration of results of such election,
forward the names and permanent addresses of the elected
Members to the Registrar, where the Committee stands
constituted.
Constitution
of the
Committee
92

(b) The Registrar shall, within fifteen days from the date of receipt
E-17 or E-9, publish or cause to be published such names and
addresses.
114 Cessation of Membership of the Committee
(a) A person shall cease to be a Member of the Committee, if—
(i) he / she has incurred any of the disqualifications mentioned
under bye-law No. 107; or
Cessation of
Membership
of the
Committee
(b) Where a Member incurs any disqualification under bye-law
No. 107, the Committee shall record the same in the minutesof
its meeting and the Secretary shall inform the concerned
Member and the Registrar accordingly.
Such Member shall cease to hold office from the date of
incurring such disqualification, subject to confirmation by the
Registrar, wherever required under the Act.
115 Presence of Committee Member in Interested Matters
(a) No Member of the Committee shall be present at the discussion
or decision on any matter in which he / she is directly or
indirectly interested.
(b) Such Member shall disclose the nature of interest before the
Committee and shall withdraw from the meeting while such
matter is being considered.
Any decision taken in contravention of this provision shall be
liable to be set aside.
Presence of
Committee
Member in
Interested
Matters
116 Period of Office of the Elected Committee
(a) The Committee elected under these Bye-laws shall hold office
for a period of five years from the date of assuming charge, as
provided under Section 154B-19 (3) of the Act.
(b) The term of the elected Members of the Committee shall be
reckoned from the date of the first meeting of the newly
constituted Committee.
Period of
Office of the
Elected
Committee
(c) The term of the office bearers of the Society shall be co-
terminus with the term of the Committee, as provided under
Section 154B-19(3) of the Act.
117 First Meeting of Newly Elected Committee
(a) The first meeting of the newly elected Committee shall be held
for the purpose of electing the office bearers of the Society, in
accordance with the Election Rules framed under Section
73CB of the Act.
93

(b) In case of Type “E” Societies, the Returning Officer shall
convene the meeting of the elected Members of the Committee
by giving at least seven days’ prior written notice with
acknowledgment, as provided under Rule 76Q.
First Meeting
of Newly
Elected
Committee
The notice shall specify:
(i) the number of office bearers to be elected;
(ii) the date, time and place of the meeting.
(c) In case of Type “C” Societies, the meeting for election of
office bearers shall be conducted by the State Co-operative
Election Authority or its authorised officer, as per applicable
Election Rules.
(d) The election of Chairman, Secretary and Treasurer shall be
conducted strictly in accordance with the Election Rules.
(e) Upon completion of election, the outgoing Committee shall
hand over charge to the newly elected Committee as per the
Act, Rules and Bye-laws.
118 Custody of Records of the Society
(a) All records of the Society shall be kept at its registered office
or at such place as approved by the Committee.
(b) The records shall remain under the custody of the Secretary,
who shall ensure their proper maintenance, safety and
accessibility in accordance with the Act, Rules and these Bye-
laws.
Custody of
Records of the
Society
119 Handover of Charge by Outgoing Committee
(a) Upon election of the new Committee, the Secretary of the
outgoing Committee shall prepare a complete inventory of all
records, registers, documents, funds and property of the
Society in his custody and hand over the same to the newly
elected Chairman.
(b) The outgoing Chairman shall hand over the charge of the office
of the Committee and all records and property of the Society in
his possession to the Chairman of the newly elected
Committee, in accordance with Section 160 of the Act.
Handover of
Charge by
Outgoing
Committee
(c) The handover of charge as stated above shall be completed
within a period of 15 days from the date of constitution of the
new Committee, and the same shall be duly recorded in writing
as per these Bye-laws.
(d) In case of failure to hand over charge within the prescribed
period:
(i) The newly elected Committee shall issue a written notice to the
outgoing office bearers requiring immediate compliance;
94

(ii) If the outgoing office bearers fail to comply within the
stipulated time, the Committee may report the matter to the
Registrar for appropriate action under the provisions of the
Act;
(iii) The Society may initiate proceedings for recovery of records,
documents, funds or property, including filing of appropriate
proceedings before the competent authority;
(iv) The Society may also take action for fixing responsibility and
recovery of loss, if any, caused to the Society due to such
failure, in accordance with the provisions of the Act, Rules and
these Bye-laws.
120 Election of Office Bearers
(a) Every Committee, at its first meeting held under Bye-law No.
112, shall elect from amongst its Members a Chairman,
Secretary and Treasurer, in accordance with the provisionsof
the Election Rules framed under the Act.
(b) The office bearers so elected shall hold office for a period co-
terminus with the term of the Committee, subject to the
provisions of the Act, Rules and these Bye-laws.
Election of
Office Bearers
(c) An office bearer shall cease to hold office if:
(i) he / she ceases to be a Member of the Committee; or
(ii) a motion of no-confidence is passed against him / her.
Provided that such motion shall be moved in a meeting called
and presided over by the Registrar or an officer authorised by
him, upon a requisition made by not less than one-third of the
Members of the Committee, and shall be passed by a majority
of not less than two-thirds of the Members present and entitled
to vote.
Provided further that no such motion shall be brought within a
period of six months from the date of the previous motion.
121 Place of Meeting and Quorum of Committee
(a) The meetings of the Committee shall ordinarily be held at the
registered office or premises of the Society, or at such place as
may be decided by the Committee.
(b) The quorum for a meeting of the Committee shall be a simple
majority of the existing Committee Members, unless otherwise
provided under these Bye-laws.
Place of
Meeting and
Quorum of
Committee
(c) No business shall be transacted at any meeting of the
Committee unless the quorum is present at the time of
consideration of each item on the agenda.
122 Frequency of Committee Meetings
95

(a) The Committee shall meet as often as necessary, but at least
once in every month, for the proper conduct of the affairsof
the Society, in accordance with these Bye-laws.
Frequency of
Committee
Meetings
(b) In case of urgency, the Committee may pass resolutions by
circulation, provided that such resolutions shall be placed
before the Committee for confirmation at the next meeting, and
shall form part of the proceedings of that meeting.
123 Casual Vacancies in the Committee
(a) A casual vacancy in the Committee arising due to death,
resignation, disqualification, removal, incapacity of a Member
or any other reason before the expiry of his / her term may be
filled by the Committee by co-option, in accordance with Rule
106C-13(4) of the Rules and these Bye-laws.
Casual
Vacancies in
the
Committee
(b) The Secretary or any person authorised by the Committee shall
invite nominations from eligible Members by giving not less
than seven days’ notice, by displaying the same on the Notice
Board of the Society.
(c) The nominations received shall be scrutinized by the
Committee and the list of valid nominations shall be placed
before the Committee.
(d) Where the number of valid nominations exceeds the numberof
vacancies, the Committee shall fill such vacancy by majority
decision in its meeting, subject to quorum provisions under
these Bye-laws.
(e) The Member so co-opted shall be from the same category or
class of Members in respect of which the vacancy has arisen,
wherever applicable.
(f) The term of the co-opted Member shall be co-terminus with the
term of the Committee.
(g) The proceedings of such co-option shall be recorded in the
minutes of the Committee meeting in accordance with these
Bye-laws.
124 Resignation of Committee Member and Effective Date
(a) A Member of the Committee may resign from the Committee
by submitting a written resignation addressed to the Chairman
of the Society.
(b) The resignation shall be placed before the Committee for
consideration.
Resignation of
Committee
Member and
Effective Date
96

(c) The resignation shall take effect from the date of its acceptance
by the Committee or on the expiry of a period of thirty days
from the date of receipt of such resignation by the Chairman or
the Secretary of the Society, whichever is earlier, and such
resignation shall be deemed to have been accepted upon expiry
of the said period, notwithstanding that the Committee has not
accepted or has rejected the same.
(d) The Member submitting resignation may withdraw the
resignation at any time before its acceptance by the Committee
or before the expiry of the said period of thirty days, whichever
is earlier, by giving a written intimation to the Chairman or the
Secretary of the Society.
(e) Upon such resignation becoming effective, the vacancy shall be
treated as a casual vacancy and shall be filled in accordance
with these Bye-laws.
125 Authority to Issue Notice of Committee Meeting
(a) The Secretary of the Society shall, in consultation with the
Chairman, issue not less than three clear days’ notice of every
meeting of the Committee to all Members of the Committee,
specifying the date, time, place and agenda of the meeting.
Authority to
Issue Notice
of Committee
Meeting
(b) (a) Where the Secretary fails to issue such notice, the Chairman
shall issue the same.
(b) No meeting of the Committee shall be convened by any
person other than as provided in these Bye-laws.
126 Presiding Over Committee Meeting
(a) The Chairman of the Society shall preside over all meetings of
the Committee.
Presiding Over Committee Meeting
Presiding
Over
Committee
Meeting
(b) Provided that, in the absence of the Chairman, the Members
present shall elect one amongst themselves to preside over the
meeting for that occasion.
127 Voting in Committee Meeting
(a) Every Member of the Committee shall have one vote.
Voting in Committee Meeting
(b) All decisions shall be taken by majority of votes of the
Members present and voting.
Voting in
Committee
Meeting
(c) In case of equality of votes, the Chairman of the meeting shall
have a second or casting vote.
128 Special Meeting of the Committee
97

(a) Upon a requisition made by not less than one-third of the
Members of the Committee, the Secretary shall convene a
Special Meeting of the Committee within a period of seven
days from the date of receipt of such requisition.
Special Meeting of the Committee
(b) Such meeting shall be convened only for the purpose of
considering the business specified in the requisition.
(c) If the Committee fails to hold at least one meeting in a calendar
month as required under these Bye-laws, any Member of the
Committee may make a written request to the Chairman to
convene the meeting.
(d) In the event of failure by the Chairman to convene the meeting
pursuant to a request made under sub-clause (3) within a period
of seven days from the date of receipt of such request, the
concerned Member may make an application to the Registrar.
Special
Meeting of
the
Committee
(e) Upon receipt of such application, the Registrar may, after such
inquiry as deemed necessary, issue appropriate directions and
may:
(i) authorise the concerned Housing Federation of which the
Society is affiliated to convene and conduct the meeting; or
(ii) appoint an authorised officer or person to convene and conduct
such meeting.
(f) The expenses incurred for convening and conducting such
meeting shall be borne by the Society.
129 Recording of Minutes of Committee Meeting
(a) The Secretary of the Society shall attend every meeting of the
Committee and shall record the minutes of the meeting and
place the same before the next meeting of the Committee for
confirmation.
(b) The minutes shall be confirmed in the subsequent meeting and
shall be signed by the Chairman of the meeting and the
Secretary.
Recording of
Minutes of
Committee
Meeting
(c) In the absence of the Secretary, the Chairman shall make
suitable alternative arrangements for recording the minutesof
the meeting.
130 Conduct of Committee Meetings through Audio-Visual Mode a new
provision
98

(a) Notwithstanding anything contained in these Bye-laws, the
Committee may, by passing a resolution, permit conduct of its
meetings through audio-visual mode (video conferencing or
other similar electronic means).
Conduct of Committee Meetings through Audio-Visual Mode
(b) Where a meeting is proposed to be conducted through such
audio-visual mode, the Secretary shall provide the link or
access details along with the notice of the meeting issued under
these Bye-laws.
(c) The Members participating through such audio-visual mode
shall be deemed to be present for the purpose of quorum and
voting.
(d) The proceedings of such meetings shall be recorded in writing
in the minutes of the meeting, in accordance with these Bye-
laws.
Conduct of
Committee
Meetings
through Audio-
Visual Mode
(e) There shall be no mandatory requirement of video recordingof
such meetings; however, the Committee may decide to record
the proceedings, if deemed necessary.
(f) Every Member attending the meeting through audio-visual
mode shall:
(i) ensure proper identification and participation from a location
free from disturbance;
(ii) maintain discipline, decorum and dignity during the
proceedings;
(iii) not allow participation of any unauthorised person;
(iv) follow the directions of the Chairman for orderly conduct of
the meeting.
(g) In case of any disruption, disorderly conduct, or breach of
decorum, the Chairman may regulate participation of such
Member, including restricting or discontinuing such
participation for that meeting, subject to recording the same in
the minutes.
(h) The Committee may, by resolution, prescribe detailed
protocols and safeguards for conduct of meetings through
audio-visual mode, consistent with the provisions of the Act,
Rules and these Bye-laws.
131 Joint and Several Responsibility of Committee Members
99

(a) The Members of the Committee shall be jointly and severally
responsible for all decisions taken by the Committee during
their term in respect of the affairs and business of the Society.
(b) The Members of the Committee shall be jointly and severally
responsible for all acts of commission or omission which are
detrimental to the interest of the Society.
Joint and
Several
Responsibility
of Committee
Members
(c) Such responsibility shall be subject to the provisions of the
Act, Rules and these Bye-laws.
132 Powers, Functions and Duties of the Committee existing
provisions
grouped
for clarity
(a) (i) The Committee shall be the executive and administrative
authority of the Society and shall, subject to the provisionsof
the Act, the Rules, Government directions, the resolutionsof
the General Body and these Bye-laws, manage, administer and
supervise the affairs, property and business of the Society and
exercise such powers and perform such functions and duties as
are conferred upon it under the Act, the Rules and these Bye-
laws.
(b) (ii) Without prejudice to the generality of clause (i), the
Committee shall—
(i) (a) implement the resolutions of the General Body and ensure
compliance with the provisions of the Act, the Rules,
Government directions and these Bye-laws;
(ii) (b) administer and protect the movable and immovable
property, common areas, common facilities, common services,
assets, funds and records of the Society;
(iii) (c) prepare and place before the General Body the Annual
Budget, financial statements, proposals relating to maintenance
contributions, service charges and such other matters requiring
the approval of the General Body;
(iv) (d) administer, invest and utilise the statutory funds and other
funds of the Society in accordance with law and the resolutions
of the General Body;
100

(v) (e) approve expenditure, execute contracts and incur
expenditure within the powers conferred by the Act, the Rules,
these Bye-laws and the resolutions of the General Body;
(vi) (f) appoint, supervise and, where necessary, remove employees
and appoint Advocates, Chartered Accountants, Auditors,
Architects, Engineers, Project Management Consultants,
Valuers, Contractors and other professionals required for the
efficient administration of the Society;
(vii) (g) ensure proper maintenance, repairs, structural stability, fire
safety, electrical safety, lift safety, water quality, sanitation and
all other statutory compliances relating to the Society’s
property;
(viii) (h) obtain, renew and maintain adequate insurance of the
Society’s property and pursue insurance claims wherever
necessary;
(ix) (i) ensure proper maintenance, preservation, digitisation,
confidentiality and security of the books of account, statutory
registers, records, documents and electronic data of the Society
and facilitate inspection and supply of copies in accordance
with the Act, the Rules and these Bye-laws;
(x) (j) ensure timely preparation, audit, adoption and filing of
accounts, audit rectification reports, statutory returns and all
other reports, statements and compliances required under law;
(xi) (k) ensure that every application, request, complaint and
proceeding received by the Society is processed, decided and
communicated within the time prescribed under the Act, the
Rules, Government directions and these Bye-laws;
(xii) (l) monitor recovery of the dues of the Society and initiate
appropriate proceedings wherever required under the Act and
these Bye-laws;
(xiii) (m) execute conveyance, deemed conveyance, lease deeds,
redevelopment documents and such other statutory or
contractual documents on behalf of the Society after obtaining
the approvals required under law;
(xiv) (n) scrutinise tenders, quotations and proposals relating to
major repairs, redevelopment and other works and place its
recommendations before the General Body wherever required;
101

(xv) (o) regulate and manage the common areas, common facilities,
parking spaces and such other common amenities in
accordance with the Act, the Rules and these Bye-laws;
(xvi) (p) frame and implement administrative policies, operating
procedures and standard forms consistent with the Act, the
Rules and these Bye-laws wherever considered necessary for
the efficient management of the Society;
(xvii) (q) ensure compliance with all statutory timelines prescribed
under the Act, the Rules, Government directions and theseBye-
laws and fix responsibility upon the concerned office bearer or
employee for any default or delay;
(xviii) (r) The Committee and every office bearer shall exercise only
such powers and perform only such functions and duties as are
conferred by the Act, the Rules, Government directions, these
Bye-laws, the resolutions of the General Body or any other
applicable law. They shall not impose any restriction,
condition, obligation, charge, penalty or requirement upon any
Member, Joint Member, Associate Member, Provisional
Member, family member, tenant, licensee, caretaker, occupant
or any other person which is inconsistent with, or not
authorised by, the Act, the Rules, Government directions, these
Bye-laws or any other applicable law.
(xix) (s) The Committee and every office bearer shall act fairly,
reasonably, transparently and in good faith and shall ensure
equal treatment to all Members, Joint Members, Associate
Members, Provisional Members, their family members,
tenants, licensees, caretakers and other lawful occupants
similarly situated. No person shall be subjected to arbitrary,
discriminatory or unequal treatment or be denied any right,
facility, service or benefit on grounds not authorised by the
Act, the Rules, Government directions, these Bye-laws or any
other applicable law.
(xx) (t) The Committee shall not pass any resolution, issue any
circular, guideline, direction, policy or decision which is
inconsistent with or contrary to the provisions of the Act, the
Rules, Government directions, these Bye-laws or any other
applicable law. Any such resolution, circular, guideline,
direction, policy or decision shall, to the extent of such
inconsistency, be void and unenforceable.
102

133 Powers, Functions and Duties of the Chairman existing
provisions
grouped
for clarity
(a) (i) The Chairman shall be the head of the Society and the
Committee and shall, subject to the provisions of the Act, the
Rules, Government directions and these Bye-laws, provide
leadership, guidance and overall supervision for the proper
governance and administration of the Society.
(b) (ii) Without prejudice to the generality of clause (i), the
Chairman shall—
(i) (a) preside over the meetings of the General Body and the
Committee and ensure that the business of the meetings is
conducted in an orderly, fair, transparent and democratic
manner;
(ii) (b) ensure that the Committee functions collectively within the
powers conferred by the Act, the Rules, Government directions
and these Bye-laws and that matters reserved for the General
Body are not decided by the Committee;
(iii) (c) supervise and guide the functioning of the Secretary,
Treasurer, other office bearers, Committee Members,
employees and professionals engaged by the Society;
(iv) (d) ensure that the resolutions of the General Body and the
Committee are implemented effectively and within the
prescribed time;
(v) (e) monitor compliance with the Act, the Rules, Government
directions, these Bye-laws and statutory timelines applicable to
the Society;
(vi) (f) review the administration, financial position, maintenance,
repairs, redevelopment, conveyance, litigation, statutory
compliances and other important matters affecting the Society
and place appropriate matters before the Committee;
(vii) (g) sign the minutes of meetings, share certificates, conveyance
deeds, agreements and such other documents as required under
the Act, the Rules, these Bye-laws or the resolutions of the
Committee or the General Body;
(viii) (h) represent the Society before Government authorities,
statutory authorities, courts, tribunals, financial institutions and
other bodies or authorise any office bearer, employee or
professional to represent the Society wherever permitted by
law or authorised by the Committee;
103

(ix) (i) ensure that the Committee and every office bearer discharge
their respective duties efficiently, impartially and in accordance
with the Act, the Rules, Government directions and these Bye-
laws;
(x) (j) in cases of emergency involving immediate danger to life,
health, safety or the property of the Society, take such
temporary measures as are reasonably necessary, provided that
the reasons are recorded in writing and the action is placed
before the next meeting of the Committee for ratification;
(xi) (k) exercise a casting vote in the event of equality of votes,
where permitted under these Bye-laws;
(xii) (l) perform such other powers, functions and duties as may be
conferred by the Act, the Rules, Government directions, these
Bye-laws or the resolutions of the General Body or the
Committee.
(c) (iii) The Chairman shall not—
(i) (a) exercise any power or perform any function not conferred
by the Act, the Rules, Government directions, these Bye-laws
or a lawful resolution of the General Body or the Committee;
(ii) (b) interfere with the statutory duties specifically assigned to
any other office bearer except in the discharge of his
supervisory functions;
(iii) (c) issue any direction, circular, order or instruction
inconsistent with the Act, the Rules, Government directions,
these Bye-laws or the lawful resolutions of the General Body
or the Committee; or
(iv) (d) act arbitrarily or discriminate between Members, Joint
Members, Associate Members, Provisional Members, their
family members, tenants, licensees, caretakers or other lawful
occupants in the discharge of his duties.
134 Powers, Functions and Duties of the Secretary existing
provisions
grouped
for clarity
(a) (i) The Secretary shall be the Chief Executive and
Administrative Officer of the Society and shall, subject to the
provisions of the Act, the Rules, Government directions, these
Bye-laws and the lawful directions of the Committee, be
responsible for the day-to-day administration and executionof
the affairs of the Society.
104

(b) (ii) Without prejudice to the generality of clause (i), the
Secretary shall—
(i) (a) convene meetings of the General Body and the Committee,
issue notices, prepare the agenda in consultation with the
Chairman and record and maintain the minutes of such
meetings;
(ii) (b) maintain the books of account, statutory registers, records,
correspondence, files, electronic records and the seal of the
Society and ensure their proper custody, preservation,
digitisation, confidentiality and retrieval;
(iii) (c) process and place before the Committee all applications,
requests, complaints and matters required to be decided under
the Act, the Rules and these Bye-laws;
(iv) (d) maintain the Register of Members, Share Register,
Nomination Register, Register of Associate Members, Register
of Provisional Members, Parking Register, Tenant Register and
such other statutory registers and records as may be required
under law;
(v) (e) ensure timely preparation and service of bills, demand
notices, notices of meetings and all other communications
required under the Act, the Rules and these Bye-laws;
(vi) (f) ensure timely filing of statutory returns, reports, disclosures
and compliances required under the Act, the Rules and any
other applicable law;
(vii) (g) make available records for inspection and provide certified
copies of records in accordance with the Act, the Rules and
these Bye-laws;
(viii) (h) supervise the employees of the Society and ensure
implementation of the resolutions of the General Body and the
Committee;
(ix) (i) carry out or arrange inspection of the Society’s property,
common areas, common facilities and such other matters as
may be required under these Bye-laws and place the inspection
reports before the Committee;
(x) (j) issue notices relating to maintenance, repairs, statutory
compliance and violations of the Act, the Rules or these Bye-
laws, as authorised by the Committee or where required under
law;
(xi) (k) correspond on behalf of the Society with Members,
Government authorities, statutory authorities, local authorities,
utility providers, financial institutions and other persons, as
authorised;
105

(xii) (l) maintain proper records of recovery proceedings, litigation,
conveyance, redevelopment, contracts, insurance, statutory
permissions and all other legal matters relating to the Society;
(xiii) (m) facilitate electronic communication, digital record
management and audio-visual meetings in accordance with the
Act, the Rules and these Bye-laws;
(xiv) (n) promptly bring to the notice of the Committee any breach
of the Act, the Rules, Government directions or these Bye-laws
or any matter requiring immediate attention;
(xv) (o) discharge such other powers, functions and duties as may
be assigned by the Committee or required under the Act, the
Rules, Government directions and these Bye-laws.
(c) (iii) The Secretary shall not withhold, suppress, alter or delay
any record, application, notice, communication or statutory
compliance without lawful authority and shall perform his
duties fairly, impartially, diligently and in good faith.
135 Powers, Functions and Duties of the Treasurer existing
provisions
grouped
for clarity
(a) (i) The Treasurer shall be the financial officer of the Society
and shall, subject to the provisions of the Act, the Rules,
Government directions and these Bye-laws, supervise and
monitor the financial affairs of the Society and ensure proper
financial management, accountability and transparency.
(b) (ii) Without prejudice to the generality of clause (i), the
Treasurer shall—
(i) (a) supervise the maintenance of the books of account,
financial records and other accounting documents of the
Society and ensure that they are complete, accurate and
updated;
(ii) (b) ensure that all receipts, payments, investments and financial
transactions are properly accounted for and carried out in
accordance with the Act, the Rules, these Bye-laws and the
resolutions of the Committee;
(iii) (c) supervise the preparation of the Annual Budget, financial
statements, balance sheet, income and expenditure account and
other financial reports required under law;
106

(iv) (d) monitor the collection of maintenance charges,
contributions and other dues payable to the Society and
periodically review the financial position of the Society;
(v) (e) supervise the operation of the Society’s bank accounts,
investments and statutory funds and ensure that they are
managed in accordance with law and the resolutions of the
General Body;
(vi) (f) ensure that payments are made only after due sanction and
in accordance with the financial powers delegated under these
Bye-laws;
(vii) (g) coordinate with the Statutory Auditor, Internal Auditor and
other financial professionals and ensure timely completionof
audit and compliance with audit observations and rectification
reports;
(viii) (h) review the financial risks, outstanding liabilities and
contingent liabilities of the Society and place significant
matters before the Committee;
(ix) (i) ensure compliance with all statutory financial requirements,
including taxation, deductions, statutory payments, filing of
financial returns and maintenance of financial records under
applicable law;
(x) (j) place before the Committee and the General Body such
financial statements, reports and information as may be
required under the Act, the Rules and these Bye-laws;
(xi) (k) perform such other financial powers, functions and duties
as may be assigned by the Committee or required under the
Act, the Rules, Government directions and these Bye-laws.
(c) (iii) The Treasurer shall not—
(i) (a) authorise or permit any expenditure or financial transaction
contrary to the Act, the Rules, Government directions, these
Bye-laws or the resolutions of the General Body or the
Committee;
(ii) (b) permit any Society funds to be utilised for purposes not
authorised by law or by the resolutions of the General Body or
the Committee;
(iii) (c) suppress, alter or misrepresent any financial record, account
or statement of the Society; or
(iv) (d) fail to promptly report any financial irregularity, fraud,
misappropriation, loss or material financial risk coming to his
knowledge to the Committee
107

(d) (iv) Every office bearer shall discharge the duties assigned to
him under the Act, the Rules, Government directions and these
Bye-laws honestly, fairly, diligently, transparently and in good
faith and shall remain accountable for any act of commission or
omission attributable to the duties of his office in accordance
with the provisions of the Act and other applicable law.
CHAPTER XIV- MAINTENANCE OF ACCOUNT
BOOKS AND REGISTERS
136 The Society may maintain the following books of accounts,
records and registers as per the requirement:—
Registers
(i) The Register of Members in “I” Form prescribed under Rule 32
of the Maharashtra Co-operative Societies Rules, 1961.
Rule 32
(ii) The List of Members in “J” Form prescribed under Rule 33of
the Maharashtra Co-operative Societies Rules, 1961.
Rule 33
(iii) The Cash Book.
(iv) The General Ledger.
(v) The Personal Ledger.
(vi) The Sinking Fund Register.
(vii) The Audit Rectification Report Register / File in “O” Form
prescribed under the said Rules.
(viii) The Investment Register.
(ix) The Nomination Register.
(x) The Society / Members Loan Register / Mortgage Register.
(xi) The Minutes Book of the Meetings of the Committee of the
Society.
(xii) The Minutes Book of the Meetings of the General Body of the
Society.
(xiii) The Property Register including furniture, fixtures and office
equipment.
(xiv) The Structural Audit Register / File, Fire Audit Register / File
and Lift Inspection Record.
(xv) The Register of Provisional Members.
(xvi) The Register of Associate Members.
(xvii) Share Register.
(xviii) Tenants Register.
(xiv) Parking Register.
137 The Society may maintain separate files for the following
subjects:—

(i) Applications for Membership. Maintenance
of Files
(ii) Applications for Provisional / Associate Membership.
108

(iii) Letters of resignation of Membership including Associate
Membership.
(iv) Applications for transfer of shares and/or interest in the
capital/property of the Society.
(v) Cases of expulsion of Members.
(vi) Nominations made by Members including revocations thereof.
(vii) Separate file for correspondence with each Member.
(viii) Correspondence with the Co-operative Registrar.
(ix) Correspondence relating to Property Taxes including Non-
Agricultural Taxes.
(x) Correspondence relating to common electric supply.
(xi) Correspondence relating to conveyance of the property.
(xii) All types of Agreements along with connected papers.
(xiii) Approved plans of construction and correspondence thereon.
(xiv) Applications for allotment of parking spaces.
(xv) Vouchers along with bills arranged in order of entries in Cash
Book / Journal.
(xvi) Counterfoils of challans deposit slip for bank credits arranged
date-wise.
(xvii) Counterfoils of cheques issued.
(xviii) Counterfoils of share certificates.
(xix) Applications for duplicate share certificates.
(xx) Application for registration of the Society, copy of Bye-laws
and amendments thereto.
(xxi) Certificate of Registration of the Society.
(xxii) Counterfoils / copies of receipts issued by the Society.
(xxiii) Counterfoils / copies of bills issued for Society charges.
(xxiv) Correspondence regarding loans received and property
mortgaged.
(xxv) Notices and Agenda of Committee and General Body
Meetings.
(xxvi) Periodical Statements of Accounts.
(xxvii) Committee’s Annual Reports on working of the Society.
(xxviii) Audit Memos received from Statutory Auditors with
rectification reports.
(xxix) Audit Reports received from Internal Auditors with
rectification reports.
(xxx) Papers pertaining to elections of the Committee.
(xxxi) Complaints received from Members and correspondence
thereof.
109

Note: The Society shall also maintain files relating to other
subjects not expressly mentioned above.
138 Maintenance, Preservation and Custody of Books, Registers
and Records
new
provision
added
(a) (i) The Society shall maintain and preserve all books of
account, statutory registers, records, documents, files and
electronic records required under the Act, the Rules,
Government directions and these Bye-laws.
(b) (ii) The Society may maintain such books, registers, records
and documents in physical form, electronic form or in both
forms, wherever permitted under law, and shall ensure their
proper custody, preservation, confidentiality and protection
against loss, damage or unauthorised alteration.
(c) (iii) The following records shall ordinarily be preserved
permanently:—
(i) (a) Certificate of Registration of the Society, registered Bye-
laws and amendments thereto;
(ii) (b) Register of Members, Share Register, Share Certificate
records and all records relating to admission, transfer,
cessation, nomination and membership;
(iii) (c) Minutes Books of General Body Meetings and Committee
Meetings together with the resolutions passed therein;
(iv) (d) Conveyance Deed, Deemed Conveyance Order, Lease
Deed, title documents, approved building plans,
Commencement Certificate, Occupancy Certificate,
Completion Certificate and other permanent records relating to
the Society’s property;
(v) (e) Structural Audit Reports, redevelopment or self-
redevelopment records and documents affecting the title or
structure of the Society;
(vi) (f) Annual Financial Statements, Statutory Audit Reports and
final orders, judgments, awards or recovery certificates
affecting the rights, property or liabilities of the Society;
(vii) (g) Such other records as may be required to be permanently
preserved under the Act, the Rules, Government directions or
any other applicable law.
(d) (iv) The following records shall ordinarily be preserved for ten
years:—
(i) (a) Cash Book, General Ledger, Journal, Bank Books, Bank
Statements and other accounting records;
110

(ii) (b) Vouchers, receipts, bills, invoices and supporting financial
documents;
(iii) (c) Audit Rectification Reports and audit compliance records;
(iv) (d) Investment records, loan records and deposit records;
(v) (e) Contracts, agreements, tenders, quotations, work orders and
completion reports;
(vi) (f) Insurance policies and insurance claim records;
(vii) (g) Taxation records and statutory financial filings;
(viii) (h) Fire safety, lift safety and electrical inspection records.
(e) (v) The following records shall ordinarily be preserved for five
years:—
(i) (a) Leave and Licence intimations, tenant, licensee, caretaker
and occupant records;
(ii) (b) Parking records, EV charging records and other operational
registers;
(iii) (c) Complaints, applications, routine correspondence and
administrative files;
(iv) (d) Annual Maintenance Contract records and routine
maintenance records;
(v) (e) Employee records after cessation of service;
(vi) (f) Water quality reports, housekeeping, security and other
routine operational records.
(f) (vi) The following records shall ordinarily be preserved for one
year:—
(i) (a) Attendance sheets of meetings after confirmation of the
minutes;
(ii) (b) Draft notices, draft agenda papers and temporary working
papers;
(iii) (c) Temporary inward and outward dispatch records and other
routine administrative papers having no continuing legal,
financial or administrative value.
(g) (vii) No record shall be destroyed before the expiry of the
prescribed period or where its preservation is directed by the
Registrar, any competent authority or a Court.
CHAPTER XVII – ACCOUNTS, AUDIT AND
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT
139 Accounting Year Section 81,
Rule 61,
62, 65
The accounting year of the Society shall commence on the 1st
day of April and end on the 31st day of March of the
succeeding year.
111

140 Books of Accounts and Financial Records
(a) (1) The Society shall maintain proper, complete and up-to-date
books of accounts, registers, documents and financial records,
in physical form, electronic form or both, in accordance with
the provisions of the Act, the Rules and these Bye-laws.
(b) (2) Without prejudice to the Act and the Rules, the Society
shall maintain, inter alia, the following records:—
(i) (a) Cash Book, Day Book and Bank Book;
(ii) (b) General Ledger and Member-wise Personal Ledger;
(iii) (c) Bills Register, Collection Register and Receipt Books;
(iv) (d) Register of Investments;
(v) (e) Register of Fixed Assets and Property Register;
(vi) (f) Stock and Dead Stock Register;
(vii) (g) Register of Deposits and Loans, where applicable;
(viii) (h) Register of Auditors and their Written Consent;
(ix) (i) Register of Audit Objections and Audit Rectification;
(x) (j) Such other books, registers, statements and records as may
be prescribed under the Act, the Rules or by the Registrar.
(a) (3) Every financial transaction shall be supported by proper
vouchers and documentary evidence and shall be recorded
promptly and accurately.
(b) (4) Where accounting work is entrusted to an accountant,
consultant or software service provider, the Committee shall
remain responsible for the correctness, completeness,
authenticity and preservation of all books of accounts and
financial records.
141 Preparation of Financial Statements, Audit and Annual Returns
(a) (1) Within forty-five days from the close of the accounting
year, the Committee shall prepare the Annual Financial
Statements comprising:—
(i) (a) Receipts and Payments Account;
(ii) (b) Income and Expenditure Account or Profit and Loss
Account, as applicable;
(iii) (c) Balance Sheet;
(iv) (d) Schedules and statements required under the Act and the
Rules.
(b) (2) The Annual Financial Statements shall remain open for
inspection by Members during office hours and shall be
supplied to the Statutory Auditor within fifteen days from the
date of their preparation.
112

(c) (3) Within sixty days from the close of the accounting year, the
Society shall hand over the books of accounts, registers,
financial statements and all relevant records to the Statutory
Auditor appointed under Section 81 of the Act.
Sec. 81
(d) (4) The Statutory Auditor shall complete the audit and submit
the Audit Report to the Society and the Registrar within four
months from the close of the Co-operative Year, i.e., on or
before 31st July.
(e) (5) A copy of the Audited Financial Statements, Audit Report
and Committee Report shall be displayed on the Notice Board
and made available to the Members at least fourteen days
before the Annual General Body Meeting.
(f) (6) The Annual General Body Meeting shall consider and
adopt the Audited Financial Statements, Audit Report and
Committee Report within six months from the close of the
accounting year or within such extended period as may be
permitted under the Act.
(g) (7) The Society shall file the Annual Returns, Audited
Financial Statements, Audit Report and all other documents
prescribed under the Act and the Rules with the Registrar
within six months from the close of the accounting year,
ordinarily on or before 30th September, or within such
extended period as may be prescribed.
142 Appointment of Auditor Section 81
(a) The Statutory Auditor or Auditing Firm shall be appointed by
the Annual General Body Meeting from the panel approved
under the Act.
(b) Before appointment, the Society shall ensure that the proposed
Auditor is eligible and has not exceeded the audit assignment
limit prescribed under the Act.
(c) The appointment, written consent and remuneration of the
Auditor shall be recorded and submitted in the manner
prescribed under the Act and the Rules.
143 Audit Compliance and Rectification
(a) The Committee shall provide the Auditor with unrestricted
access to all books of accounts, registers, documents, vouchers,
agreements, electronic records and information required for
conducting the audit.
(b) On receipt of the Audit Report, the Committee shall place the
Audit Report before the next General Body Meeting.
113

(c) The Society shall rectify the defects and irregularities pointed
out in the Audit Report and submit the Audit Rectification
Report to the Registrar within three months from the dateof
the Audit Report, in accordance with Section 82 of the Act and
Rule 73 of the Rules.
Section 82
of the Act
and Rule
73
(d) The Committee shall continue to submit further Audit
Rectification Reports whenever required until all audit
objections are fully complied with to the satisfaction of the
Registrar.
(e) Every Member of the Committee and every Officer responsible
for maintaining the accounts shall be jointly and severally
responsible for compliance with the provisions relating to
accounts, audit, audit rectification and statutory filings under
the Act, the Rules and these Bye-laws.
144 Write-off of Irrecoverable Dues
(a) The Society may write off any amount due from a Member or
any other person, including maintenance charges, interest,
recovery expenses, legal expenses or any other amount
lawfully recoverable, only where such amount has become
irrecoverable and its recovery is not reasonably practicable.
existing
provision
(b) No amount shall be written off unless—
(i) all reasonable steps for recovery under the Act, Rules and these
Bye-laws have been taken;
(ii) the amount is certified as irrecoverable by the Statutory
Auditor appointed under the Act;
(iii) the Managing Committee records detailed reasons for
recommending such write-off; and
(iv) the General Body Meeting approves the proposal by passing an
appropriate resolution.
(c) Where the Society is indebted to any financing institution or
where approval of any authority is required under the Act,
Rules or Government directions, such write-off shall be subject
to obtaining the necessary approval.
(d) Where the Society has created a Bad Debt Fund or any similar
reserve for meeting irrecoverable dues, the write-off may be
adjusted against such fund in accordance with the Act, Rules,
Government directions and applicable Accounting Standards.
(e) Every proposal for write-off shall contain—
(i) the name of the Member or person concerned;
(ii) the amount proposed to be written off;
114

(iii) the period to which the dues relate;
(iv) the recovery proceedings undertaken;
(v) reasons why recovery has become impracticable; and
(vi) the recommendation of the Managing Committee and the
Statutory Auditor.
(f) A write-off shall be an accounting adjustment only and shall
not, by itself, extinguish or waive the legal right of the Society
to recover the amount if it subsequently becomes recoverable
under law.
145 Register of Written-off Dues existing
provision
(a) The Society shall maintain a Register of Written-off Dues
containing—
(i) the name of the Member or person concerned;
(ii) amount written off;
(iii) date of General Body approval;
(iv) reasons for write-off;
(v) particulars of recovery proceedings taken; and
(vi) subsequent recoveries, if any.
(b) Where any amount written off is subsequently recovered, the
same shall be credited to the accounts of the Society in
accordance with applicable Accounting Standards and the
provisions of the Act and Rules.
CHAPTER XV. CONVEYANCE / DEEMED
CONVEYANCE, STRUCTURAL REPAIRS
146 Conveyance / Deemed Conveyance of the Property
(a) The Managing Committee shall, with the prior approval of the
General Body Meeting, take all necessary steps for execution
of the Conveyance or Deemed Conveyance of the land and
building or buildings in favour of the Society in accordance
with law.
Conveyance /
Deemed
Conveyance
of the
Property
Existing
provisions
and new
additions
for
transparen
cy
(b) Where the Promoter fails to execute the Conveyance within the
prescribed period, it shall be the duty of the Managing
Committee to initiate proceedings for obtaining Deemed
Conveyance under the applicable law.
(c) The Managing Committee shall examine, in consultation with
the Advocate or Legal Advisor of the Society, the draft
Conveyance Deed or Deemed Conveyance documents and
place the same before the General Body Meeting for approval.
115

(d) Upon approval by the General Body Meeting, the Managing
Committee shall execute, register and complete the
Conveyance or Deemed Conveyance and undertake all
consequential actions required under law.
(e) The Society shall preserve all title deeds, conveyance
documents, sanctioned plans and other property records as
permanent records.
147 Maintenance and Repairs of Society Property
(a) The Managing Committee shall be responsible for maintaining
the property of the Society in good condition and ensuring
timely repairs, preventive maintenance and compliance with all
statutory requirements.
Maintenance
and Repairs
of Society
Property
(b) On receipt of any complaint from a Member, or whenever
considered necessary, the Secretary shall inspect the property,
either personally or along with a qualified Architect, Structural
Engineer or Technical Expert, and submit a report to the
Managing Committee indicating the nature and urgency of
repairs.
(c) Every Member shall permit reasonable access to his Flat or
premises for inspection, maintenance, repairs, replacement of
common services or rectification of defects affecting the
common areas or any other part of the Society property.
(d) The Managing Committee shall decide the nature, priority and
manner of execution of repairs based upon the inspection
report and the interest of the Society.
(e) The Managing Committee shall be competent to incur one-time
expenditure on repairs and maintenance of the Society property
in a financial year, without prior approval of the General Body
Meeting, provided such expenditure does not exceed—
(i) up to 25 Members – ₹1,00,000;
(ii) 26 to 50 Members – ₹2,00,000;
(iii) 51 to 100 Members – ₹3,00,000;
(iv) 101 to 1000 Members – ₹4,00,000;
(v) 1001 and above Members – ₹5,00,000.
(f) Where the estimated expenditure exceeds the above limit, prior
approval of the General Body Meeting shall be mandatory
except in cases of emergency repairs undertaken under these
Bye-laws.
(g) The General Body Meeting shall determine the monetary limit
up to which tenders need not be invited. Where the estimated
cost exceeds such limit, tenders shall be invited through a fair,
transparent and competitive process.
116

(h) Expenditure on repairs shall ordinarily be met from the Repairs
and Maintenance Fund, Major Repairs Fund, Sinking Fund or
any other lawful source approved under the Act, Rules and
these Bye-laws.
148 Appointment of Architect, Structural Engineer or
Technical Expert
(a) For major repairs, structural repairs or other technical works,
the Society shall appoint a qualified Architect, Structural
Engineer or Technical Expert with the approval of the General
Body Meeting.
Appointment
of Architect,
Structural
Engineer or
Technical
Expert
new added
for
transperan
cy
(b) The Managing Committee shall ordinarily obtain proposals
from at least three qualified professionals and place a
comparative statement before the General Body Meeting.
(c) The appointment shall specify the scope of work, fees,
responsibilities, deliverables and time schedule.
(d) The Managing Committee shall execute an agreement with the
selected professional.
(e) In cases of emergency affecting the safety of the building or
occupants, the Managing Committee may appoint a qualified
professional immediately and undertake urgent protective
measures. Such action shall be reported to and ratified by the
next General Body Meeting.
(f) The appointed professional shall—
(i) inspect the building;
(ii) assess its condition;
(iii) prepare technical reports, drawings, specifications and
estimates;
(iv) advise on the nature and urgency of repairs;
(v) supervise execution wherever required;
(vi) certify stage-wise and final completion;
(vii) assist in obtaining statutory approvals wherever necessary.
149 Procedure for Major Repairs and Structural Repairs
(a) Major repairs and structural repairs shall ordinarily be
undertaken on the basis of a Structural Audit Report or
technical report prepared by a qualified professional.
Procedure for
Major
Repairs and
Structural
Repairs
(b) The Managing Committee shall place before the General Body
Meeting—
(i) the Structural Audit Report or technical report;
(ii) details of proposed works;
117

(iii) estimated cost;
(iv) expected extension of the life of the building;
(v) source of funds;
(vi) proposed method of execution.
(c) The General Body Meeting shall approve the scope of work,
estimated cost, source of funds and method of execution.
(d) Where tenders are required, the Managing Committee shall
invite them through a fair, transparent and competitive process,
prepare a comparative statement and place the same before the
General Body Meeting.
(e) The General Body Meeting shall approve the contractor or
agency for execution of the work.
(f) The Managing Committee shall execute the agreement with the
selected contractor or agency and supervise the execution of
the work.
(g) The General Body Meeting may constitute a Works Monitoring
Committee to monitor the progress of the work and report
periodically to the Managing Committee.
(h) The Managing Committee shall ensure that all technical
reports, estimates, tender documents, comparative statements,
work orders, agreements, stage-wise progress reports and
completion certificates are available for inspection by Members
and are communicated through the Notice Board, electronic
means or the Society website, if any.
(i) Upon completion of the work, the Managing Committee shall
place before the General Body Meeting—
(i) the Completion Certificate;
(ii) final statement of expenditure;
(iii) details of deviations, if any;
(iv) warranties and guarantees received;
(v) defect liability obligations of the contractor, if any.
CHAPTER XVI - REDEVELOPMENT OF SOCIETY
PROPERTY
(Self-Redevelopment and Redevelopment through Developer)
150 Redevelopment of Society Property
118

(a) The Society may undertake redevelopment of its property,
including the land, building or buildings, appurtenant areas and
common facilities, by way of—
as per the
GR of
redevelop
ment dated
4.7.2019
and self-
redevelop
ment dated
13.9.2021
(i) redevelopment through a developer;
(ii) self-redevelopment;
(iii) cluster or group redevelopment;
(iv) redevelopment through a federation or apex body, where
permissible; or
(v) any other lawful mode of redevelopment permitted under
applicable law.
(b) Every redevelopment shall be undertaken strictly in accordance
with—
(i) the Government Directives issued from time to time under
Section 79A of the Maharashtra Co-operative Societies Act,
1960;
(ii) the Maharashtra Co-operative Societies Act, 1960 and the
Rules made thereunder;
(iii) the applicable Development Control and Promotion
Regulations;
(iv) the Maharashtra Regional and Town Planning Act, 1966;
(v) the Real Estate (Regulation and Development) Act, 2016,
wherever applicable;
(vi) all other applicable laws, Government policies and statutory
permissions.
(c) The General Body shall be the supreme authority for every
policy decision relating to redevelopment.
(d) The Managing Committee shall act only as the executive body
for implementation of the decisions of the General Body.
(e) The Society shall ensure transparency, fairness, equal treatment
of Members and proper disclosure throughout the
redevelopment process.
151 Initiation of Redevelopment
(a) The redevelopment process may be initiated—
(i) by the Managing Committee; or
119

(ii) upon a requisition made by the Members in accordance with
the Government Directives.
(b) Upon receipt of such proposal, the Managing Committee shall
convene a Special General Body Meeting within the period
prescribed by the Government Directives.
(c) The notice of the meeting shall clearly specify the agenda
relating to redevelopment and shall be issued in the manner
prescribed under these Bye-laws and the Government
Directives.
(d) Before placing any proposal for redevelopment before the
General Body, the Managing Committee shall collect and place
all relevant technical, financial and legal information necessary
to enable the Members to take an informed decision.
152 Preliminary Assessment
Before deciding redevelopment, the Society shall, as far as
practicable, examine—
(a) the structural condition and remaining useful life of the
building;
(b) the feasibility and estimated cost of structural repairs and major
repairs;
(c) the feasibility of redevelopment;
(d) the feasibility of self-redevelopment and redevelopment
through a developer;
(e) the planning potential of the property under the applicable
Development Control Regulations;
(f) the financial implications, risks and expected benefits of each
option;
(g) all other relevant factors affecting the long-term interest of the
Society.
153 Appointment of Architect / Project Management Consultant
(a) Where considered necessary, the Society shall appoint an
Architect or Project Management Consultant with the approval
of the General Body.
(b) Such appointment shall be made in a fair, transparent and
competitive manner in accordance with the Government
Directives.
(c) The General Body shall approve the scope of services,
professional fees and terms of appointment.
(d) The Architect or Project Management Consultant shall function
as an independent professional advisor to the Society and shall
act in the best interest of the Society.
120

(e) No Architect or Project Management Consultant having a
conflict of interest with the proposed developer, contractor or
any other project participant shall be appointed.
154 Duties of the Architect / Project Management Consultant
The Architect or Project Management Consultant shall, subject
to the terms of appointment—
(a) examine the title documents, plans, statutory approvals and
other records relating to the property;
(b) identify deficiencies requiring rectification before
redevelopment;
(c) prepare feasibility reports, project reports, estimates, tender
documents and other technical documents;
(d) advise the Society regarding self-redevelopment and
redevelopment through a developer;
(e) assist the Society in obtaining statutory approvals and
permissions;
(f) assist the Society in evaluation of bids and selection of the
developer or contractor;
(g) supervise the implementation of the project in accordance with
approved plans and applicable law;
(h) monitor quality, progress and timelines;
(i) certify work, measurements and stage-wise payments,
wherever required;
(j) periodically submit factual progress reports to the Managing
Committee and General Body;
(k) perform such other professional duties as may be entrusted by
the Society.
155 Due Diligence before Redevelopment
Before commencement of redevelopment, the Society shall,
wherever applicable—
(a) verify the title and property records;
(b) complete conveyance or deemed conveyance;
(c) verify approved plans, Occupation Certificate, Completion
Certificate and other statutory approvals;
(d) review pending litigation or encumbrances affecting
redevelopment;
(e) update statutory records of the Society;
(f) recover outstanding dues, as far as practicable;
(g) take such further steps as may be necessary for successful
implementation of the project.
156 Feasibility Report
The Architect or Project Management Consultant shall prepare
a feasibility report covering, as applicable—
121

(a) legal and title aspects;
(b) planning and development potential;
(c) structural condition of the building;
(d) comparative analysis of repairs and redevelopment;
(e) comparative analysis of self-redevelopment and redevelopment
through a developer;
(f) financial feasibility;
(g) project implementation schedule;
(h) rehabilitation, transit accommodation and other Member-
related aspects;
(i) project risks and mitigation measures;
(j) such other matters as may be relevant for decision making.
The feasibility report shall be placed before the General Body
before taking any final decision regarding redevelopment.
157 Decision of the General Body
(a) The General Body shall consider the feasibility report and all
relevant information placed before it.
(b) The General Body shall decide—
(i) whether redevelopment shall be undertaken;
(ii) whether redevelopment shall be by self-redevelopment or
through a developer;
(iii) whether to appoint the necessary professionals;
(iv) whether to authorise the Managing Committee to undertake
further steps.
(c) Every decision shall be taken only in accordance with the
Government Directives and applicable law.
158 Self-Redevelopment
(a) The Society may undertake self-redevelopment in accordance
with the applicable Government policies and directives.
(b) The General Body may appoint such Architects, Engineers,
Project Management Consultants, Contractors, Legal
Consultants, Chartered Accountants and other professionals as
may be necessary.
(c) Separate books of account, bank account and project records
shall be maintained for the self-redevelopment project.
(d) All borrowings, expenditure and financial commitments
relating to the project shall require prior approval of the
General Body, unless otherwise authorised by it.
159 Redevelopment through Developer
122

(a) Where redevelopment is undertaken through a developer, the
Society shall ensure a transparent and competitive process for
selection of the developer in accordance with the Government
Directives.
(b) The terms and conditions of redevelopment, including the
Development Agreement and all other project documents, shall
be approved by the General Body before execution.
(c) The Managing Committee shall periodically monitor the
progress of the project and place the progress reports before the
General Body.
160 Transparency and Member Participation
(a) The Society shall maintain complete transparency throughout
the redevelopment process.
(b) Members shall be kept informed of all material developments
through notices, meetings, electronic communication or any
other mode approved by the General Body.
(c) The Society shall maintain complete records of all notices,
resolutions, reports, tenders, comparative statements,
agreements, statutory approvals, correspondence and other
documents relating to redevelopment.
(d) Every Member shall be entitled to inspect the redevelopment
records and obtain copies in accordance with the Act, Rules
and these Bye-laws.
(e) The Managing Committee shall periodically place before the
General Body a report on the physical and financial progress of
the redevelopment project until completion.
161 Compliance with Government Directives
If any provision of this Chapter is inconsistent with any
Government Directive issued under Section 79A of the
Maharashtra Co-operative Societies Act, 1960 or any statutory
provision governing redevelopment, the Government Directive
or statutory provision, as amended from time to time, shall
prevail to the extent of such inconsistency.
CHAPTER XVII- EMERGENCY PLANNING, SAFETY,
ENVIRONMENT AND SUSTAINABILITY
123

162 Emergency Planning and Disaster Preparedness new
addition
along with
existing
provision
for better
learning
and green
initiatives
(a) The Managing Committee shall prepare and maintain an
Emergency Planning and Disaster Preparedness Scheme for the
Society building, common areas and immediate surroundings.
(b) The Scheme shall, as far as practicable, include provisions
regarding:
(i) identification of possible risks such as fire, structural danger,
flood, electrical failure, lift failure, medical emergency and
other disasters;
(ii) evacuation routes, assembly points and emergency access;
(iii) contact details of Police, Fire Brigade, Municipal Authorities,
hospitals, ambulance services and other emergency agencies;
(iv) duties of Committee Members, employees, security staff and
residents during emergencies;
(v) rescue, first aid, communication and temporary restoration of
essential services;
(vi) location and maintenance of fire-fighting systems, alarms,
emergency lights, pumps, generators and other safety
equipment.
(c) The Scheme shall be reviewed at least once in every co-
operative year and placed before the General Body Meeting for
information.
(d) The Society may conduct mock drills, awareness programmes
and training sessions for fire safety, disaster management, first
aid and emergency response.
163 Emergency Contact Information
(a) The Society shall maintain and periodically update emergency
contact information of:
(i) Members and occupants;
(ii) Government and emergency authorities;
(iii) electricity, water supply, lift, fire-fighting, security and other
essential service providers;
124

(iv) nearby hospitals, doctors, ambulances and medical facilities.
(b) Such information shall be kept readily available with the office
of the Society, security staff and such responsible persons as
may be authorised by the Managing Committee.
164 General Safety and Statutory Compliance
(a) The Society shall comply with all applicable laws, permissions,
directions and requirements relating to fire safety, structural
safety, public health, sanitation, disaster management,
environmental protection, lifts, electrical installations and
common facilities.
(b) The Managing Committee shall ensure that statutory
inspections, certificates, audits, renewals and maintenance
contracts required under law are obtained or renewed within
the prescribed time.
(c) No Member, occupant, tenant, visitor or any other person shall
do any act which may endanger the safety, security, health,
hygiene or structural stability of the building, common areas or
residents.
(d) Where any serious safety risk, structural defect, fire hazard or
statutory violation is noticed, the Managing Committee shall
take immediate steps to inform the concerned authority and
take reasonable preventive or corrective measures.
165 Prohibition of Child Labour
(a) Employment of child labour within the Society premises shall
be strictly prohibited in accordance with law.
(b) The Managing Committee shall inform Members, contractors,
agencies and service providers that no child labour shall be
engaged for any work within the Society premises.
(c) Any violation noticed by the Society shall be reported to the
competent authority.
166 Protection of Society Property, Trees and Common Assets
(a) No Member, occupant, tenant, visitor or any other person shall:
(i) damage, deface, misuse or destroy any property of the Society;
(ii) cut, remove, damage or destroy trees, plants, landscaping or
greenery without permission of the competent authority,
wherever required;
(iii) make any unauthorised construction, alteration, enclosure or
encroachment in common areas;
125

(iv) obstruct passages, staircases, lobbies, terraces, refuge areas,
fire exits, emergency access routes or fire-fighting equipment;
(v) tamper with lifts, pumps, meters, CCTV, fire systems,
electrical panels, water lines, drainage lines or any common
installation.
(b) Any loss, damage or expense caused by such act may be
recovered from the concerned Member or person responsible,
without prejudice to any action under law.
167 Regulation of Pets and Animal Safety
(a) A Member may keep pets in his flat, subject to applicable laws,
municipal regulations and reasonable safety and hygiene
requirements.
(b) No Member shall be prohibited from keeping a pet merely
because other residents object to keeping of pets in the
premises.
(c) The owner of the pet shall ensure that:
(i) the pet does not cause nuisance, danger or injury to residents;
(ii) cleanliness is maintained in common areas;
(iii) vaccination, registration and health requirements are complied
with;
(iv) the pet is properly controlled in common areas;
(v) any injury, nuisance, cleaning cost or damage caused by the pet
is borne by the owner.
(d) No person shall treat any animal with cruelty.
(e) The Society may coordinate with the local authority or
recognised agencies for vaccination, sterilisation and humane
management of stray animals.
168 Waste Management and Cleanliness
(a) The Society and all Members shall comply with municipal
solid waste management rules and directions of the local
authority.
(b) Every Member and occupant shall:
(i) segregate waste as required by the local authority;
(ii) dispose of waste only at designated places;
(iii) not throw waste in passages, staircases, lifts, open spaces,
drains, terraces or adjoining properties;
(iv) maintain cleanliness in and around his premises.
(c) The Managing Committee shall make reasonable arrangements
for collection, segregation, storage, composting, recycling and
disposal of waste, wherever applicable.
126

(d) No person shall create unhygienic conditions or dispose of
waste in a manner harmful to public health, cleanliness or
environment.
169 Environmental Sustainability and Green Measures
(a) The Society shall, as far as practicable, promote water
conservation, energy efficiency and environment-friendly
maintenance of the Society property.
(b) The Society may adopt measures such as rainwater harvesting,
reuse of treated water, prevention of water leakage, energy-
efficient lighting, solar energy systems, tree plantation,
landscaping, composting and electric vehicle charging
infrastructure, wherever feasible and permissible.
(c) Every Member shall maintain internal plumbing and sanitary
fittings so as to prevent leakage, seepage and wastage of water.
(d) No Member or occupant shall cause pollution, contamination,
discharge of hazardous substances or environmental damage
within the Society premises.
170 Safety Records and Community Resilience
The Society may maintain and periodically update:
(a) safety records, statutory compliance registers and maintenance
records;
(b) electronic backup of important Society records;
(c) standard operating procedures for emergencies;
(d) contingency arrangements for essential services;
(e) records of safety complaints and action taken thereon;
(f) awareness programmes for Members, residents, employees and
service providers.
171 Use of Common Areas and Amenities
(a) All Members, Joint Members, Associate Members, Provisional
Members, tenants, occupants, family members, guests and
visitors shall use the common areas and amenities in a proper,
disciplined, safe and lawful manner.
(b) Common areas and amenities shall include passages, staircases,
lifts, lobbies, terraces, refuge areas, gardens, open spaces,
parking areas, gymnasium, swimming pool, clubhouse,
community hall, play areas and such other facilities provided
by the Society.
(c) The use of amenities shall be subject to timings, safety norms,
maintenance requirements and reasonable guidelines framed by
the Managing Committee or approved by the General Body
Meeting.
127

(d) No person shall use any common area or amenity in a manner
causing nuisance, obstruction, inconvenience, risk, damage or
disturbance to other residents.
(e) No common area or amenity shall be used for any unlawful,
hazardous, commercial or unauthorised purpose without
necessary permission of the Society and the competent
authority, wherever required.
172 Timings and Regulated Use of Facilities
(a) The Society may fix and display timings for use of gymnasium,
swimming pool, garden, clubhouse, play area, community hall
and other common amenities.
(b) Every Member, occupant, guest and visitor shall follow the
prescribed timings, safety instructions and user guidelines.
(c) The Managing Committee may temporarily restrict use of any
amenity for repairs, maintenance, safety, hygiene, statutory
compliance or special circumstances.
(d) Children shall use common facilities subject to supervision and
safety conditions prescribed by the Society.
(e) No person shall use any facility beyond permitted timings or in
breach of prescribed rules.
173 Internal Regulations for Common Areas and Society Property existing
provisions
enhanced
for better
clarity and
transparen
cy
(a) The Managing Committee may, subject to these Bye-laws and
the resolutions of the General Body Meeting, regulate the use,
operation, maintenance and management of the common areas,
common amenities and common facilities of the Society.
(b) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing, the
Society may prescribe rules regarding—
(i) use of common areas and amenities;
(ii) timings for use of common facilities;
(iii) use of gymnasium, swimming pool, clubhouse, community
hall, gardens, play areas and recreational facilities;
(iv) temporary use of terraces, open spaces and other common
areas;
128

(v) advertisement boards, communication equipment and similar
installations;
(vi) renewable energy systems, electric vehicle charging
infrastructure and other common facilities;
(vii) parking discipline, movement of heavy goods, housekeeping
and waste management;
(viii) operation of lifts, water supply, electrical installations, fire-
fighting systems and other common services;
(ix) pets, cleanliness, hygiene, water conservation and
environmental protection;
(x) such other operational matters as may be necessary for proper
administration of the Society.
(c) The Managing Committee may issue operational guidelines
consistent with these Bye-laws and the resolutions of the
General Body Meeting.
(d) Every Member, Joint Member, Associate Member, Provisional
Member, occupant, tenant, licensee, family member, employee,
contractor, guest and visitor shall comply with these Bye-laws,
the lawful resolutions of the General Body Meeting and the
lawful directions issued by the Society.
174 Safety of Structure, Common Property and Statutory
Compliance
(a) Every Member and occupant shall use his flat, common areas
and Society property in a safe, lawful and responsible manner
and shall not undertake any act which is likely to affect—
(i) structural stability;
(ii) fire safety;
(iii) emergency access or refuge areas;
(iv) waterproofing;
(v) common services or installations;
(vi) public health or environmental safety;
(vii) rights of other Members in the common property.
(b) No person shall—
(i) carry out unauthorised construction, structural alteration or
encroachment;
(ii) damage or interfere with common property or common
installations;
(iii) obstruct passages, staircases, fire exits, refuge areas or
emergency access;
(iv) misuse lifts, electrical systems, pumps, fire-fighting systems or
other common utilities;
129

(v) undertake any activity contrary to applicable law or
Government directions.
(c) The Managing Committee shall ensure compliance with
statutory safety requirements and shall take prompt steps to
protect the building, common property and residents whenever
any unsafe condition, structural defect or statutory violation
comes to its notice.
175 Category I – General or Minor Violations
(a) The following shall ordinarily be treated as Category I
(General or Minor) violations, namely—
(i) breach of operational rules relating to common amenities;
(ii) violation of timings prescribed by the Society;
(iii) nuisance, excessive noise or disorderly behaviour;
(iv) littering, spitting or failure to maintain cleanliness;
(v) failure to segregate waste;
(vi) misuse of play areas, gardens or recreational facilities;
(vii) minor misuse of lifts or common facilities not resulting in
damage;
(viii) water wastage or failure to rectify internal leakage after notice;
(ix) breach of pet regulations;
(x) temporary obstruction capable of immediate removal;
(xi) breach of any other internal regulation not affecting structural
safety, common property rights or statutory compliance.
(b) A Category I violation shall not include any violation affecting
structural stability, fire safety, common property, statutory
permissions or public safety.
176 Procedure and Penalty for Category I Violations
(a) Where a Category I violation is noticed, the Managing
Committee may record the violation on the basis of direct
observation, CCTV footage, written complaint or any other
reliable material.
(b) The Society may issue a warning for a first minor violation.
(c) Where the violation continues or is repeated, the Society shall
issue notice giving reasonable opportunity to explain.
(d) After considering the explanation, the Managing Committee
may impose a penalty as approved by the General Body
Meeting, subject to the maximum amount permissible under
law.
(e) Any cleaning charges, restoration expenses or damage caused
shall be recoverable separately from the Member.
130

(f) The penalty and other recoverable charges shall be recoverable
as dues of the Society.
(g) The Society shall maintain a register of notices, violations and
penalties and shall ensure that penalties are imposed uniformly,
transparently and without discrimination.
177 Category II – Serious Violations
(a) The following shall ordinarily constitute Category II (Serious)
violations—
(i) unauthorised structural alteration or demolition;
(ii) unauthorised construction, extension or encroachment;
(iii) alteration affecting structural stability or waterproofing;
(iv) obstruction of fire exits, refuge areas or emergency access;
(v) damage to common property, lifts, electrical systems, pumps,
fire-fighting systems or other common installations;
(vi) unauthorised occupation or exclusive use of common areas;
(vii) unauthorised change of user or commercial use requiring
statutory permission;
(viii) unauthorised installation of permanent structures,
advertisement boards, communication equipment or renewable
energy systems on common property;
(ix) pollution, hazardous activities or storage of dangerous
materials;
(x) cutting of trees or damage to landscaping;
(xi) any violation requiring action by the Municipal Corporation,
Fire Authority, Planning Authority, Police or any other
competent authority;
(xii) any act likely to endanger life, structural safety or public
safety.
(b) Every violation not falling under Bye-law No. 175 shall not
automatically be treated as a Category II violation unless it
falls within sub-bye-law (1).
178 Procedure for Category II Violations and Restoration
(a) On noticing a Category II violation, the Managing Committee
shall immediately inspect the site and record the nature of the
violation.
(b) Where necessary, the Committee may obtain inspection and
reports from an Architect, Structural Engineer, Fire Consultant,
Electrical Engineer, Lift Consultant or any other competent
professional.
131

(c) The Society shall issue a detailed notice directing the Member
to discontinue the violation, restore the property or submit
explanation within the specified period.
(d) Where the violation falls within the jurisdiction of any
statutory authority, the Society shall promptly report the matter
to the concerned authority and seek appropriate action.
(e) The primary object of proceedings under this Bye-law shall be
restoration of the property, removal of the unauthorised work,
protection of structural safety and compliance with law.
(f) Where the Member fails to comply with the notice, the Society
may—
(i) undertake or arrange restoration work;
(ii) remove the unauthorised work, wherever legally permissible;
(iii) take temporary protective measures where immediate danger
exists;
(iv) initiate proceedings before the competent authority or court;
(v) recover all expenses incurred from the concerned Member as
dues of the Society.
(g) Where the violation creates imminent danger to life, property
or structural safety, the Society may take immediate protective
measures without waiting for expiry of the notice period.
179 Penalty for Category II Violations
(a) Where a Member fails to comply with the notice issued under
Bye-law No. 178 or continues or repeats the violation, the
Managing Committee may, after giving reasonable opportunity
of hearing, impose such penalty as may be approved by the
General Body Meeting and permissible under law.
(b) The penalty shall be in addition to restoration charges,
professional fees, legal expenses and any action taken by
statutory authorities.
(c) Each continuing violation may constitute a separate breach
until rectified.
180 Recovery, Records and Uniform Enforcement
(a) Every Member shall be responsible for the acts and omissions
of his family members, occupants, tenants, licensees,
employees, contractors, guests and visitors.
132

(b) All costs incurred by the Society towards inspection,
professional reports, temporary safety measures, restoration,
repairs, cleaning, removal of unauthorised work, legal
proceedings or statutory compliance shall be recoverable from
the concerned Member as dues of the Society.
(c) The Society shall maintain proper records of inspections,
notices, photographs, complaints, professional reports,
penalties, recovery and action taken.
(d) These Bye-laws shall be enforced uniformly, fairly and without
discrimination. Similar violations shall ordinarily attract
similar action.
(e) The object of these Bye-laws is to secure compliance, safety,
discipline, restoration and protection of the common property,
and not to generate revenue through penalties.
181 Temporary Use of Common Areas and Society Property
(a) The Managing Committee may, on a written application by a
Member and subject to the policy approved by the General
Body Meeting, permit temporary use of the community hall,
clubhouse, lawns, open spaces, terraces or such other common
amenities as may be designated by the Society for social,
cultural, educational, recreational or family functions.
Temporary
Use of
Common
Areas and
Society
Property
(b) Such permission shall be subject to the following conditions:—
(i) the use shall not obstruct entrances, exits, passages, emergency
access, refuge areas, fire-fighting installations or essential
services;
(ii) the use shall not cause nuisance, excessive noise,
inconvenience or damage to the Society or other residents;
(iii) no permanent structure, enclosure, alteration, excavation or
installation shall be made without approval of the Society and
of the competent authority, wherever required;
(iv) the applicant shall maintain cleanliness and restore the
premises to their original condition immediately after
completion of the permitted activity;
(v) the applicant shall be responsible for any loss, damage or
expense caused to the Society property and shall reimburse the
Society accordingly;
(vi) the Society may recover such user charges, refundable security
deposit and other charges as may be approved by the General
Body Meeting.
133

(c) Permission granted under this Bye-law shall be temporary, non-
exclusive and revocable and shall not create or confer any
tenancy, licence, easement, possessory right or any other right,
title or interest over the common areas.
182 Advertisement Boards and Communication Installations
(a) The Society may, with the prior approval of the General Body
Meeting and subject to applicable law and permissions of the
competent authority wherever required, permit installation of
advertisement boards, signages, display panels, communication
equipment, mobile infrastructure, digital display systems or
similar installations on Society property.
(b) The General Body Meeting shall determine the terms, licence
fees, period, maintenance obligations, insurance requirements
and utilisation of revenue derived from such installations.
(c) No Member shall independently install or permit any
advertisement board, hoarding, antenna, communication
equipment or similar installation on any common area or
exterior portion of the building without prior written approval
of the Society.
183 Renewable Energy and Energy Conservation
(a) The Society shall, as far as practicable, promote renewable
energy, energy conservation and sustainable management of
common facilities in accordance with applicable law.
(b) Subject to technical feasibility, structural safety and financial
viability, the Society may install solar photovoltaic systems,
solar water heating systems, electric vehicle charging
infrastructure, battery storage systems and other renewable
energy systems on terraces or other suitable common areas for
the common benefit of the Society.
(c) Such installation shall be subject to—
(i) approval of the General Body Meeting;
(ii) structural stability certification wherever required;
(iii) compliance with applicable laws, Government policies,
Development Control Regulations and safety standards;
(iv) ensuring that the installation does not adversely affect
structural stability, waterproofing, fire safety, emergency
access, refuge areas or essential services of the building.
134

(d) The General Body Meeting shall determine the manner of
utilisation of electricity or energy generated, allocation of
benefits, recovery of expenditure, maintenance responsibilities
and operation of such systems.
(e) Individual installation of solar or other renewable energy
systems by Members on common areas shall ordinarily not be
permitted.
Provided that, where adequate surplus space is available and
the Society has no proposal to install a common renewable
energy system, the Managing Committee may grant permission
in accordance with a uniform policy approved by the General
Body Meeting, subject to structural safety, technical feasibility,
applicable laws and such terms and conditions as the Society
may prescribe.
(f) Where the Managing Committee refuses such permission, the
concerned Member may, within thirty days of communication
of the decision, submit a representation to the Society. The
representation shall be placed before the next General Body
Meeting or a Special General Body Meeting convened for the
purpose. The decision of the General Body Meeting shall be
final and binding.
CHAPTER XIX. REDRESSAL OF MEMBERS’
COMPLAINTS AND GRIEVANCE MANAGEMENT
184 Submission of Complaints existing
provisions
(a) Any Member may submit a complaint in writing to any Office
Bearer of the Society, clearly stating the facts, nature of
grievance and relief sought.
Submission of Complaints
(b) The complaint shall contain sufficient particulars and
supporting documents, wherever applicable, to enable proper
consideration.
(c) No complaint relating to services, management or functioning
of the Society shall be entertained unless the Member has paid
all undisputed dues of the Society, including maintenance
charges, up to date.
Provided that, a dispute regarding the correctness or legalityof
such dues may be raised separately in accordance with law.
Condition of
Payment of
Dues
185 Registration and Acknowledgment of Complaints
135

(a) The Society shall maintain a Complaint Register in physical or
electronic form.
Registration and Acknowledgment of Complaints
(b) Every complaint shall be entered in the Register and
acknowledged within 3 days of receipt.
(c) The acknowledgment shall indicate the date of receipt and
expected time for disposal.
186 Disposal of Complaints
(a) Every complaint shall be placed before the next Managing
Committee Meeting.
Disposal of Complaints
(b) The Managing Committee shall examine the complaint and,
where necessary, provide an opportunity of hearing to the
concerned Member.
(c) The Managing Committee shall pass a reasoned decision on the
complaint.
(d) Time Limit for Disposal
i. The decision shall be communicated to the Member within 15
days from the date of the Committee Meeting.
ii. In cases involving urgent matters such as safety, essential
services or leakage, the complaint shall be addressed on
priority and, as far as practicable, within 7 days.
(e) The decision shall be recorded in the Minutes of the Meeting
and in the Complaint Register.
187 Grievance Redressal Committee (For Societies Having More
Than 50 Members)
(a) In a Society having more than 50 Members, the General Body
may, by resolution, constitute a Grievance Redressal
Committee.
(b) The Committee shall consist of: Grievance
Redressal
Committee
(For Societies
Having More
Than 50
Members)
i. One Member of the Managing Committee;
ii. Two Members of the Society who are not members of the
Managing Committee;
iii. Such other person, if considered necessary by the General
Body.
(c) The Grievance Redressal Committee shall:
136

i. Examine complaints referred to it;
ii. Provide an opportunity of hearing to the concerned parties;
iii. Attempt amicable settlement, wherever possible;
iv. Submit its recommendations to the Managing Committee
within a reasonable time.
(d) The Managing Committee shall consider such
recommendations and record its decision. In case of
disagreement, reasons shall be recorded in writing.
188 Internal Resolution and Settlement
(a) The Society shall endeavour to resolve disputes amicably
through discussion, mediation and mutual understanding before
escalation.
Internal Resolution and Settlement
Internal
Resolution
and
Settlement
(b) The Managing Committee or Grievance Redressal Committee
may facilitate such settlement in a fair and transparent manner.
(c) This provision is intended to promote harmonious living and
minimize disputes within the Society.
189 Right to Approach Competent Authority
(a) Where: Right to
Approach
Competent
Authority
i. The Member is not satisfied with the decision of the Managing
Committee; or
ii. No decision is communicated within the prescribed time;
the Member may approach the appropriate authority as
provided under these Bye-laws and applicable law.
Right to Approach Competent Authority
190 Competent Authorities for Redressal
(A) The following matters shall fall within the jurisdiction of the
Registrar or Competent Authority:—
Matters
Pertaining to
the Registrar
i. Registration of Society obtained by misrepresentation; Competent
Authorities
for Redressal
ii. Non-issuance of Share Certificates;
iii. Refusal or delay in granting Membership;
iv. Non-registration of Nomination;
v. Levy of non-occupancy charges beyond permissible limits;
vi. Charging of excess premium for transfer;
vii. Non-supply of documents and records provided under Section
154B-8 of the Act;
137

viii. Tampering, suppression or destruction of records;
ix. Refusal to accept legitimate communication or payments;
x. Improper or non-maintenance of statutory records;
xi. Non-preparation or delay in finalisation of accounts and
reports;
xii. Misappropriation or misapplication of funds;
xiii. Disqualification of Committee Members;
xiv. Investment of funds in violation of provisions;
xv. Audit and audit rectification matters;
xvi. Failure to conduct elections within prescribed time;
xvii. Rejection of nomination in election matters, where applicable;
xviii. Failure to hold Annual General Meeting within prescribed
period;
xix. Failure to convene Managing Committee meetings;
xx. Resignation or failure of Committee to function;
xxi. Non-filing of statutory returns;
xxii. Any other matter falling within the statutory jurisdiction of the
Registrar.
(B) The following disputes shall be referred to the Co-operative
Court:—
Matters
Pertaining to
Co-operative
Court
(Section 91)
i. Disputes relating to resolutions of the Managing Committee or
General Body;
ii. Election disputes, except those governed by separate election
law;
iii. Disputes relating to repairs, major repairs and leakages;
iv. Parking disputes between Members;
v. Disputes relating to allotment of flats or plots;
vi. Disputes relating to construction cost or related liabilities;
vii. Disputes relating to appointment of developer, contractor or
architect;
viii. Disputes relating to supply of services such as water;
ix. Disputes relating to recovery or excess charging of dues;
x. Any other dispute touching the constitution, management or
business of the Society.
(C) The following matters shall be dealt with by the Civil Court:— Matters
Pertaining to
Civil Court
i. Specific performance of agreements with builders or
developers;
138

ii. Disputes relating to defective or substandard construction;
iii. Title disputes and conveyance matters;
iv. Contractual disputes not covered under Section 91;
v. Any other matter of civil nature.
(D) The following matters shall be referred to the Municipal or
Local Authority:—
Matters
Pertaining to
Municipal or
Local
Authority
i. Unauthorized construction or alterations;
ii. Water supply and drainage issues;
iii. Change of user of premises;
iv. Structural safety and dangerous building issues;
v. Property tax, garbage disposal, street lighting and civic
services.
(E) The following matters shall be referred to the Police
Authorities:—
Matters
Pertaining to
Police
Authorities
i. Nuisance or illegal activities;
ii. Threats, harassment or assault;
iii. Criminal offences within the Society premises.
(F) The General Body shall be the final authority in respect of:— Matters
Within the
Authority of
the General
Body
i. Maintenance and upkeep of property;
ii. Display of Society name board;
iii. Levy and regulation of penalties;
iv. Use and regulation of common areas;
v. Insurance of Society property;
vi. Appointment of architect or consultant;
vii. Any other internal management matters.
(G) The Housing Federation may assist in:— Matters
Pertaining to
Housing
Federation
i. Resolving issues relating to non-cooperation among Members;
ii. Communication and coordination issues;
iii. Facilitating meetings under directions of the Registrar;
iv. Providing advisory support and dispute facilitation.
139

191 Transparency and Record of Complaints
(a) The Society shall maintain proper records of complaints,
decisions and actions taken.
(b) Such records shall be made available for inspection as per
applicable provisions.
Transparency
and Record of
Complaints
192 Prevention of Frivolous or Malicious Complaints
(a) Complaints shall be made in good faith.
Prevention of Frivolous or Malicious Complaints
Prevention of
Frivolous or
Malicious
Complaints
(b) Where a complaint is found to be false, frivolous or made with
malicious intent, the Managing Committee may take
appropriate action as per Bye-laws, after giving an opportunity
of hearing.
140

@rajeshlovekar
DRAFT BYE-LAWS, 2026 — FORMS 01 TO 31
Complete Consolidated Set with Master Index — Revised per Corrections
All 31 required forms drafted and reproduced in full below, across 5 chapters; Chapters VIII, XI, XIII, XIV and XIX
confirmed not required
MASTER INDEX
This index lists all forms required for the draft Bye-laws, 2026, following the corrections received. Chapters VIII, XI, XIII,
XIV and XIX have been confirmed as not required and are shown for reference only, without form numbers. All remaining
forms are numbered serially 01-31 and reproduced in full immediately after this index.
Form
No. Form Title Chapter
01 Share Certificate (Standard Issuance) VI
02 Application for Fresh Share Certificate Post-Redevelopment VI
03 Application for Duplicate Share Certificate (Loss) VI
04 Application for Duplicate Share Certificate (Damage/Mutilation) VI
05 Application for Membership by an Individual or Body/Entity (Consolidated) VII
06 Application for Joint Membership VII
07 Application for Associate Membership (Form Y-5A) VII
08 Revocation of Associate Member Recommendation/Consent VII
09 Notice of Resignation of Membership VII
10 Application for Transfer — Voluntary (Sale/Gift/Exchange) VII
11 Application for Transfer — Sale Certificate/Court/SARFAESI Route VII
12 Letter of Consent of Proposed Transferee VII
13 Nomination Form (Triplicate) VII
14 Revocation/Variation of Nomination VII
15 Application for Provisional Membership by Nominee (Form Y-4) VII
16 Public Notice — No Nomination (Invite Legal Heir Claims) VII
17 Indemnity Bond (Nominees or Legal Heirs) VII
18 Application for Membership via Family Arrangement (Form Y-5) VII
19 Public Notice — Family Arrangement (Invite Claims/Objections) VII
20 Application for Membership via Succession Document VII
21 Intimation of Exercise of Membership Rights by Transferee VII
— Chapter VIII forms (formerly 21-25) — not available / not required VIII
22 Complaint/Report of Repairs Required IX
— Member's Counter-Expert Report (formerly Form 27) — not required IX
23 Application for Permission — Repairs/Renovation/Alterations IX
24 Leakage/Seepage Complaint & Source Determination Form IX
— Chapter XI forms (formerly 30-32) — not available / not required XI
25 Application for Allotment of Parking Space XII
26 Application for Additional Parking Space (Waiting List) XII
27 Voluntary Surrender of Parking Space XII
28 Application for Installation of Private EV Charging Facility XII
29 EV Installation Compliance/Inspection Checklist XII
— Chapter XIII form (formerly 38) — not available / not required XIII
— Chapter XIV forms (formerly 39-45) — not available / not required XIV
— Chapter XIX forms (formerly 46-50) — not available / not required XIX
30 Member Complaint Application XX
31 Application to the Grievance Redressal Committee XX
Page 1

@rajeshlovekar
Form
No. Form Title Chapter
All 31 forms required per the corrected checklist are fully drafted in this set — Chapters VI, VII, IX, XII and XX.
Chapters VIII, XI, XIII, XIV and XIX confirmed as not required and removed from the scheme entirely, per
corrections received.
Page 2

@rajeshlovekar
CHAPTER VI — FUNDS, SHARE CAPITAL AND CHARGES
Forms 01 to 04 — Drafted for Adoption with the Bye-laws, 2026
Prepared per the approved Chapter-wise Forms Checklist
Form 01 — Share Certificate (standard issuance, Rule 14(a))
Form 02 — Application for Fresh Share Certificate Post-Redevelopment (Rule 14(b))
Form 03 — Application for Duplicate Share Certificate — Loss (Rule 15(a))
Form 04 — Application for Duplicate Share Certificate — Damage/Mutilation (Rule 15(b))
Page 3

@rajeshlovekar
FORM No. 01
[See Bye-laws 14(a) of the Bye-laws]
Share Certificate
_________________________________________________ Co-operative Housing Society Ltd.
Registered under the Maharashtra Co-operative Societies Act, 1960
Registration No. : _______________________ Date of Registration : _______________
Registered Address : ___________________________________________________________
SHARE CERTIFICATE
Certificate No. : _________________________
Distinctive Numbers of Shares : ________________________________________
This is to certify that Shri/Smt./M/s. :
_________________________________________________________________________________
Flat/Unit No. and Building : ______________________________________________________
is the registered holder of ________ (in words: __________________________________________) fully
paid-up shares of Rs. 50/- each, numbered from ________ to ________ (both inclusive), in the above-named
Co-operative Housing/Premises Society Ltd., subject to the provisions of the Maharashtra Co-operative
Societies Act, 1960, the Rules made thereunder, and the Bye-laws of the Society for the time being in force.
Date of Issue (within six months of allotment, per Bye-laws 14(a)) : ____________________
Given under the Common Seal of the Society this ________ day of ______________________, 20____.
_____________________________
Chairman
_____________________________
Secretary
_____________________________
Committee Member (authorised by the Committee)
Note : This Certificate shall bear the seal of the Society and be signed by the Chairman, the Secretary and one Committee
Member duly authorised by the Committee, and shall be issued by the Secretary within six months of the allotment of the
shares, in accordance with Rule 14(a). The Society shall maintain a register of share certificates in physical and/or digital
form.
Page 4

@rajeshlovekar
FORM No. 02
[See Bye-law No. 14(ii)]
Application for Fresh Share Certificate Post-Redevelopment
To,
The Secretary,
____________________________________________ Co-operative Housing Society Ltd.
____________________________________________________________________
Subject : Application for issuance of fresh Share Certificate consequent upon completion of
redevelopment/reconstruction.
Sir/Madam,
1.I/We, Shri/Smt./M/s. _________________________________________________, hereby state that I/We
was/were, prior to redevelopment, the registered holder(s) of Share Certificate No. _______ for ______
fully paid-up shares of Rs. 50/- each, bearing distinctive numbers _______ to _______ (both inclusive),
in respect of Flat/Unit No. _______ in the building of the Society known as
____________________________.
2.I/We state that the redevelopment/reconstruction of the Society's property has been completed and that
I/We have been allotted Flat/Unit No. _______ admeasuring _______ sq. mtrs. (carpet area) on the
_______ floor of the reconstructed building, in accordance with the approved plans, the Permanent
Alternate Accommodation Agreement / Development Agreement dated __________, and the Occupation
Certificate bearing No. _______ dated __________ / Completion Certificate dated __________ (strike
out whichever is not applicable).
3.I/We accordingly enclose herewith the original Share Certificate No. _______ referred to above for
cancellation, and request that a fresh Share Certificate be issued to me/us in respect of the newly allotted
Flat/Unit No. _______, within six months from the date of the Occupation Certificate/completion of
redevelopment, whichever is earlier, as provided under Rule 14(b) of the Bye-laws.
4.I/We confirm that the particulars given above are true and correct, and undertake to abide by the
provisions of the Act, the Rules and the Bye-laws of the Society.
Enclosures :
(1) Original Share Certificate (for cancellation)
(2) Certified copy of the Occupation Certificate / Completion Certificate
(3) Certified copy of the Permanent Alternate Accommodation Agreement / Allotment Letter
Yours faithfully,
_________________________________
(Signature of Applicant/s)
Place : ______________
Date : ______________
For Office Use — Society's Endorsement
Original Share Certificate No. _______ cancelled on _______. Fresh Share Certificate No. _______ issued on _______,
entered in the Register of Share Certificates at Sr. No. _______.
Signature of Secretary : _________________________
Page 5

@rajeshlovekar
FORM No. 03
[See Bye-laws 15(a) of the Bye-laws]
Application for Duplicate Share Certificate — Loss of Original
To,
The Secretary,
____________________________________________ Co-operative Housing Society Ltd.
____________________________________________________________________
Subject : Application for issuance of a duplicate Share Certificate in lieu of the original, which has been
lost.
Sir/Madam,
1.I/We, Shri/Smt./M/s. _________________________________________________, Member(s) of the
Society holding Flat/Unit No. _______ in the building known as ____________________________,
was/were the registered holder(s) of Share Certificate No. _______ for ______ fully paid-up shares of Rs.
50/- each, bearing distinctive numbers _______ to _______ (both inclusive).
2.I/We state that the said Share Certificate has been lost and, despite diligent search, could not be traced.
I/We lodged a police complaint/non-cognizable complaint in this regard at ________________________
Police Station on __________, a copy whereof is enclosed.
3.I/We accordingly request that a duplicate Share Certificate, marked 'DUPLICATE', be issued to me/us in
lieu of the original, in accordance with Rule 15(a) of the Bye-laws.
4.I/We enclose herewith an Indemnity Bond in the prescribed form, indemnifying the Society against any
claim that may be made in respect of the said Share Certificate, together with a self-declaration/affidavit
stating the circumstances of the loss.
Enclosures :
(1) Copy of the police complaint / non-cognizable complaint
(2) Indemnity Bond in the prescribed form
(3) Self-declaration/Affidavit regarding the circumstances of loss
Yours faithfully,
_________________________________
(Signature of Applicant/s)
Place : ______________
Date : ______________
For Office Use — Society's Endorsement
Duplicate Share Certificate No. _______ (marked 'DUPLICATE' in lieu of original Certificate No. _______) issued on
_______, entered in the Register of Share Certificates at Sr. No. _______.
Signature of Secretary : _________________________
Page 6

@rajeshlovekar
FORM No. 04
[See Bye-laws 15(b) of the Bye-laws]
Application for Duplicate Share Certificate — Damage / Mutilation of Original
To,
The Secretary,
____________________________________________ Co-operative Housing Society Ltd.
____________________________________________________________________
Subject : Application for issuance of a duplicate Share Certificate in lieu of the original, which is
damaged/defaced/torn/mutilated/laminated.
Sir/Madam,
1.I/We, Shri/Smt./M/s. _________________________________________________, Member(s) of the
Society holding Flat/Unit No. _______ in the building known as ____________________________,
am/are the registered holder(s) of Share Certificate No. _______ for ______ fully paid-up shares of Rs.
50/- each, bearing distinctive numbers _______ to _______ (both inclusive).
2.I/We state that the said Share Certificate has become damaged/defaced/torn/mutilated/laminated (strike
out whichever is not applicable) due to ________________________________________________, and
is accordingly no longer fit for retention in its present condition.
3.I/We accordingly request that a duplicate Share Certificate, marked 'DUPLICATE', be issued to me/us in
lieu of the original, in accordance with Bye-law No. 15(b), and enclose herewith the original Share
Certificate for surrender and cancellation.
4.I/We enclose herewith an Indemnity Bond in the prescribed form and a Self-declaration/Affidavit
regarding the circumstance of loss to be made.
Enclosures :
(1) Original Share Certificate (damaged/defaced/torn/mutilated/laminated) — for surrender and cancellation
(2) Indemnity Bond in the prescribed form
(3) Self-declaration/Affidavit regarding circumstance of loss to be made
Yours faithfully,
_________________________________
(Signature of Applicant/s)
Place : ______________
Date : ______________
For Office Use — Society's Endorsement
Original Share Certificate No. _______ surrendered and cancelled on _______. Duplicate Share Certificate No. _______
(marked 'DUPLICATE') issued on _______, entered in the Register of Share Certificates at Sr. No. _______.
Signature of Secretary : _________________________
Page 7

@rajeshlovekar
CHAPTER VII — MEMBERSHIP, NOMINATION AND RECORDING OF
NOMINATION
Forms 05 to 21 — Drafted for Adoption with the Bye-laws, 2026 (Revised per Corrections)
Prepared per the approved Chapter-wise Forms Checklist, as corrected
05 — Application for Membership by an Individual or Body/Entity (Consolidated)
06 — Application for Joint Membership
07 — Application for Associate Membership (Form Y-5A)
08 — Revocation of Associate Member Recommendation/Consent
09 — Notice of Resignation of Membership
10 — Application for Transfer of Shares & Interest — Voluntary (Sale/Gift/Exchange)
11 — Application for Transfer — Sale Certificate/Court Decree/SARFAESI Route
12 — Letter of Consent of Proposed Transferee
13 — Nomination Form (Triplicate)
14 — Revocation/Variation of Nomination
15 — Application for Provisional Membership by Nominee (Form Y-4)
16 — Public Notice — No Nomination (Invitation of Claims from Legal Heirs)
17 — Indemnity Bond (Nominees/Legal Heirs — Annexure to Forms 15, 18 & 19)
18 — Application for Membership via Family Arrangement (Form Y-5)
19 — Public Notice — Family Arrangement (Invitation of Claims/Objections)
20 — Application for Membership via Succession Document
21 — Intimation of Exercise of Membership Rights by Transferee
Page 8

@rajeshlovekar
FORM No. 05
[See Bye-laws 22-23 of the Bye-laws / Rule 106C-4]
Application for Membership by an Individual or Body/Entity
To,
The Secretary,
____________________________________________ Co-operative Housing Society Ltd.
____________________________________________________________________
Sir/Madam,
1.I/We, Shri/Smt./M/s. _________________________________________________, hereby apply for
admission as a Member of the Society. [Tick whichever is applicable:]
☐Individual applicant
☐Body/Entity applicant under Section 154B-1(20)(ii) to (xii) of the Act (Firm/Company/Local
Authority/Trust/Co-operative Society/other legal body) — authorising resolution enclosed
2.I/We have acquired right, title and interest in Flat/Unit No. _______ in the building known as
____________________________, admeasuring _______ sq. mtrs. (carpet area), under a duly stamped
and registered Agreement for Sale/Conveyance Deed/Gift Deed dated __________, executed with
____________________________, a certified copy whereof is enclosed.
3.I/We tender herewith the value of five fully paid-up shares of Rs. 50/- each, aggregating Rs. 250/-,
together with the entrance fee of Rs. 500/-, in accordance with Rule 106C-4.
4.I/We undertake to abide by the provisions of the Maharashtra Co-operative Societies Act, 1960, the Rules
made thereunder, and the Bye-laws of the Society for the time being in force.
5.My/Our particulars are as under:
Name(s) _________________________________________________
Address _________________________________________________
Contact No. / E-mail_________________________________________________
Enclosures :
(1) Certified copy of the registered Agreement for Sale / Conveyance Deed / Gift Deed
(2) Entrance fee Rs. 500/-
(3) Authorising resolution (where the applicant is a body/entity)
(4) Transfer charges Rs. 500/-, where applicable
(5) Transfer premium, maximum Rs. 25,000/-, where applicable
Yours faithfully,
_________________________________
(Signature of Applicant)
Place : ______________
Date : ______________
For Office Use — Society's Endorsement
Application scrutinised and found complete on _______. Placed before the Managing Committee on _______. Admitted as a
Member vide Committee Resolution No. _______ dated _______. Entered in the Register of I, J and Shares at Sr. No.
_______.
Page 9

@rajeshlovekar
Signature of Secretary : _________________________
Page 10

@rajeshlovekar
FORM No. 06
[See Bye-laws 24 of the Bye-laws]
Application for Joint Membership
To,
The Secretary,
____________________________________________ Co-operative Housing Society Ltd.
____________________________________________________________________
Sir/Madam,
1.We, (1) Shri/Smt. _________________________________ and (2) Shri/Smt.
_________________________________ [add further names if more than two], jointly hold right, title
and interest in Flat/Unit No. _______ in the building known as ____________________________, under
a duly stamped and registered instrument dated __________, and hereby apply for admission as Joint
Members of the Society.
2.It is agreed and confirmed that Shri/Smt. _________________________________ (Applicant No. 1
above) shall be the person whose name shall appear first in the Share Certificate and in the records of the
Society, and shall be deemed to be the Member for all purposes under the Act, the Rules and the Bye-
laws, including for exercising the right to attend and vote at General Body Meetings; in his/her absence,
the person whose name stands second shall have the right to vote, and in the absence of both, the person
whose name stands next, and likewise, whichever such person is present and is not a minor shall have the
right to vote, in accordance with Section 154B-11(4) of the Act.
3.The remaining applicant(s) named above consent to being admitted as Joint Member(s) and confirm that
any notice or communication served upon the first-named Member shall be deemed to have been duly
served upon all of us.
4.We tender herewith the value of five fully paid-up shares of Rs. 50/- each and the entrance fee of Rs.
500/-, in accordance with Rule 106C-4.
Enclosures :
(1) Certified copy of the registered instrument of title
(2) Demand Draft/Cheque for share value and entrance fee
Yours faithfully,
_________________________________
(Signatures of all Joint Applicants)
Place : ______________
Date : ______________
For Office Use — Society's Endorsement
Admitted as Joint Members vide Committee Resolution No. _______ dated _______. Entered in the Register of I, J and Shares
at Sr. No. _______, with Shri/Smt. _______ recorded as first-named Member.
Signature of Secretary : _________________________
Page 11

@rajeshlovekar
FORM No. 07
[See Bye-laws 25 of the Bye-laws / Rule 106C-5(i)]
Application for Associate Membership — Form Y-5A
Note: This Form is hereby substituted by, and shall be issued and used in the form of, the official Form Y-5A prescribed under
Rule 106C-5. The content below is drafted to conform to Form Y-5A pending independent verification of the exact prescribed
text against the Gazette notification.
To,
The Secretary,
____________________________________________ Co-operative Housing Society Ltd.
____________________________________________________________________
Sir/Madam,
1.I, Shri/Smt. _________________________________________________, being the
son/daughter/spouse/father/mother/brother/sister/son-in-law/daughter-in-law/nephew/niece (strike out
whichever is not applicable) of Shri/Smt. _________________________________________________,
the Member holding Flat/Unit No. _______ in the building known as ____________________________,
hereby apply for admission as an Associate Member, so as to hold the shares and interest in the Society
jointly with the said Member.
2.The written recommendation and consent of the Member is appended below.
3.I confirm that I am a relative within the meaning of Section 154B-1(18)(a) of the Act, as set out at Bye-
law No. 4(xxi)(a), and that I shall exercise only such rights and discharge such duties as are specifically
conferred on an Associate Member under the Act, the Rules and the Bye-laws.
4.I am aware that no separate entrance fee is prescribed for admission as an Associate Member under Rule
106C-5.
Yours faithfully,
_________________________________
(Signature of Associate Member Applicant)
Place : ______________
Date : ______________
Recommendation and Consent of the Member
I, Shri/Smt. _________________________________________________, Member holding Share Certificate No.
_______ in respect of Flat/Unit No. _______, hereby recommend and consent to the admission of the above-named
applicant as an Associate Member to hold the shares and interest in the Society jointly with me, and request that
the applicant's name be entered in the Share Certificate next after mine.
Signature of the Member : _________________________________
For Office Use — Society's Endorsement
Admitted as Associate Member vide Committee Resolution No. _______ dated _______. Entered in the Register of Associate
Members at Sr. No. _______.
Signature of Secretary : _________________________
Page 12

@rajeshlovekar
FORM No. 08
[See Bye-laws 25(c) of the Bye-laws]
Revocation of Associate Member Recommendation/Consent
To,
The Secretary,
____________________________________________ Co-operative Housing Society Ltd.
____________________________________________________________________
Sir/Madam,
1.I, Shri/Smt. _________________________________________________, Member holding Flat/Unit No.
_______ in the building known as ____________________________, had recommended and consented
to the admission of Shri/Smt. _________________________________________________ as an
Associate Member vide my recommendation dated __________.
2.I hereby revoke and withdraw the said recommendation and consent with immediate effect, in accordance
with Bye-law No. 25(c).
3.I request that the Associate Membership of the said person be treated as ceased and the necessary entries
be made in the records of the Society.
Yours faithfully,
_________________________________
(Signature of the Member)
Place : ______________
Date : ______________
For Office Use — Society's Endorsement
Revocation recorded on _______. Associate Membership of Shri/Smt. _______ stands ceased with effect from _______.
Register of Associate Members updated accordingly.
Signature of Secretary : _________________________
Page 13

@rajeshlovekar
FORM No. 09
[See Bye-laws 42(a) of the Bye-laws]
Notice of Resignation of Membership
To,
The Secretary,
____________________________________________ Co-operative Housing Society Ltd.
____________________________________________________________________
Sir/Madam,
1.I/We, Shri/Smt. _________________________________________________, Member(s)/Joint
Member(s) (strike out whichever is not applicable) of the Society holding Share Certificate No. _______
for _______ fully paid-up shares in respect of Flat/Unit No. _______ in the building known as
____________________________, hereby give notice of my/our intention to resign from Membership of
the Society, in accordance with Bye-law No. 42(a).
2.I/We am/are aware that this resignation shall be effective from the date of its acceptance by the
Committee or on the expiry of three months from the date of this notice, whichever is earlier, and that no
resignation shall be accepted unless all undisputed dues payable to the Society have been paid in full.
3.I/We confirm that the particulars given above are true and correct.
Enclosures :
(1) Original Share Certificate, for surrender upon acceptance of resignation
Yours faithfully,
_________________________________
(Signature/s of Member/s resigning)
Place : ______________
Date : ______________
For Office Use — Society's Endorsement
Notice received and entered on _______. Dues, if any, communicated to the Member on _______ (within 15 days), payable
within 30 days thereof, in accordance with Bye-law No. 43. Resignation accepted by the Committee on _______ and
communicated to the Member within three months of the date of this notice, in accordance with Bye-law No. 43.
Signature of Secretary : _________________________
Page 14

@rajeshlovekar
FORM No. 10
[See Bye-laws 26(a)(i)-(iii) and 27 of the Bye-laws]
Application for Transfer of Shares & Interest — Voluntary Transfer
To,
The Secretary,
____________________________________________ Co-operative Housing Society Ltd.
____________________________________________________________________
Sir/Madam,
1.I/We, Shri/Smt./M/s. _________________________________________________ (Transferor), holding
Share Certificate No. _______ for _______ fully paid-up shares in respect of Flat/Unit No. _______ in
the building known as ____________________________, propose to transfer my/our shares and interest
in the capital/property of the Society to Shri/Smt./M/s.
_________________________________________________ (Transferee), by way of [tick whichever is
applicable:]
☐duly stamped and registered Agreement for Sale/Conveyance Deed dated __________;
☐duly stamped and registered Gift Deed dated __________;
☐duly stamped and registered Exchange Deed dated __________.
2.I/We (the Transferor) hereby tender my/our resignation from Membership, to take effect upon admission
of the Transferee.
3.I/We (the Transferee) hereby apply for admission as a Member of the Society in respect of the said
Flat/Unit, and tender herewith the entrance fee of Rs. 500/-.
4.We enclose the original Share Certificate, the registered instrument referred to above, and proof of
payment of the transfer fee of Rs. 500/- and transfer premium (maximum Rs. 25,000/-), as applicable.
5.It is noted that nothing in this transfer shall affect the first charge of the Society under Section 154B-7 of
the Act upon the shares and interest transferred, and the rights of the Society to recover any dues shall
remain unaffected.
Enclosures :
(1) Original Share Certificate
(2) Certified copy of the registered instrument of transfer
(3) Transferor's resignation letter
(4) Transferee's Membership application and entrance-fee (Rs. 500/-) payment proof
(5) Transfer charges Rs. 500/- and transfer premium (maximum Rs. 25,000/-), as applicable
Signature of Transferor : _________________________________
Signature of Transferee : _________________________________
Place : ______________ Date : ______________
For Office Use — Society's Endorsement
Transfer approved vide Committee Resolution No. _______ dated _______. Transferee admitted as Member and entered in the
Register of I, J and Shares at Sr. No. _______. Fresh/endorsed Share Certificate No. _______ issued on _______.
Signature of Secretary : _________________________
Page 15

@rajeshlovekar
FORM No. 11
[See Bye-laws 26(a)(iv)-(v) and (d) of the Bye-laws]
Application for Transfer — Sale Certificate / Court Decree / SARFAESI Route
To,
The Secretary,
____________________________________________ Co-operative Housing Society Ltd.
____________________________________________________________________
Sir/Madam,
1.I, Shri/Smt./M/s. _________________________________________________, having purchased
Flat/Unit No. _______ in the building known as ____________________________, previously held by
Shri/Smt./M/s. _________________________________________________ (erstwhile Member),
pursuant to a Sale Certificate/Court Decree/Order dated __________ issued by [tick whichever is
applicable:]
☐a Court / Recovery Officer under the Maharashtra Co-operative Societies Act, 1960;
☐an Authorised Officer under the Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of
Security Interest Act, 2002 (SARFAESI Act);
☐a Bank/Financial Institution/Credit Agency or other Competent Authority under applicable law,
hereby apply for admission as a Member of the Society in respect of the said Flat/Unit.
2.I confirm that this transfer is one effected by operation of law/statutory recovery/legal proceedings, and I
accordingly request that the Society register this transfer notwithstanding that the erstwhile Member is
unable, unwilling or not available to execute any application, resignation, declaration or undertaking
ordinarily required for a voluntary transfer, in accordance with Bye-law No. 26(d).
3.I tender herewith the entrance fee of Rs. 500/- and enclose a certified copy of the Sale Certificate/Court
Decree/Order referred to above.
Enclosures :
(1) Certified copy of the Sale Certificate / Court Decree / Order
(2) Proof of payment of entrance fee Rs. 500/-
(3) Any other document evidencing the auction/recovery proceedings
Yours faithfully,
_________________________________
(Signature of Purchaser/Applicant)
Place : ______________
Date : ______________
For Office Use — Society's Endorsement
Transfer registered notwithstanding non-availability of the erstwhile Member's signature, vide Committee Resolution No.
_______ dated _______, in accordance with Bye-law No. 26(d). Applicant admitted as Member; Register of I, J and Shares
updated at Sr. No. _______.
Signature of Secretary : _________________________
Page 16

@rajeshlovekar
FORM No. 12
[See Bye-laws 27(b)(ii) of the Bye-laws]
Letter of Consent of Proposed Transferee
To,
The Secretary,
____________________________________________ Co-operative Housing Society Ltd.
____________________________________________________________________
Sir/Madam,
1.I, Shri/Smt./M/s. _________________________________________________, refer to the proposed
transfer of shares and interest in respect of Flat/Unit No. _______ in the building known as
____________________________ by Shri/Smt./M/s.
_________________________________________________ (Transferor) in my/our favour.
2.I/We hereby give my/our consent to the said transfer on the terms agreed between myself/ourselves and
the Transferor, and confirm that I/we shall abide by the provisions of the Act, the Rules and the Bye-laws
of the Society upon admission as Member.
Yours faithfully,
_________________________________
(Signature of Transferee)
Place : ______________
Date : ______________
Page 17

@rajeshlovekar
FORM No. 13
[See Bye-laws 28 of the Bye-laws / Section 154B-13 and Rule 106C-8 — To be furnished in Triplicate]
Nomination Form
To,
The Secretary,
____________________________________________ Co-operative Housing Society Ltd.
____________________________________________________________________
Sir/Madam,
1.I, Shri/Smt./M/s. _________________________________________________, Member/Joint Member
(strike out whichever is not applicable) of the Society, holding Share Certificate No. _______ for
_______ fully paid-up shares in respect of Flat/Unit No. _______ in the building known as
____________________________, hereby nominate the following person(s) under Section 154B-13 of
the Act and Rule 106C-8:
Name(s) of Nominee(s) _________________________________________________
Address(es)_________________________________________________
Relationship_________________________________________________
Proportion of devolution (if more than one nominee; equal share if left blank)
_________________________________________________
2.This nomination is made for the purpose of admission of the nominee as a Provisional Member upon my
death, pending final settlement of my legal heirs, and I confirm that this nomination does not by itself
confer any ownership, title or beneficial interest in the flat/unit upon the nominee.
3.I confirm that the above nominee(s) is/are not, to my knowledge, an Associate Member or Provisional
Member of the Society, and that this nomination is made by me as a full Member/Joint Member.
4.I understand that no fee is payable for this nomination if it is my first nomination, and that a fee of Rs.
100/- is payable for any subsequent nomination, revocation or variation.
Yours faithfully,
_________________________________
(Signature of Nominator)
Place : ______________
Date : ______________
Witnesses:
1. Name & Address : _________________________________ Signature : _______________
2. Name & Address : _________________________________ Signature : _______________
For Office Use — Society's Endorsement
Nomination placed before the Committee meeting held on _______ and recorded in the Minutes. Entered in the Register of
Nominations at Sr. No. _______.
Signature of Secretary : _________________________
Page 18

@rajeshlovekar
FORM No. 14
[See Bye-laws 28(d) and Bye-law 29 of the Bye-laws]
Revocation / Variation of Nomination
To,
The Secretary,
____________________________________________ Co-operative Housing Society Ltd.
____________________________________________________________________
Sir/Madam,
1.I, Shri/Smt. _________________________________________________, Member/Joint Member of the
Society holding Flat/Unit No. _______, had earlier made a nomination dated __________ in favour of
Shri/Smt. _________________________________________________.
2.I hereby revoke the said nomination in its entirety / vary the said nomination as set out in the fresh
Nomination Form (Form No. 13) enclosed herewith (strike out whichever is not applicable).
3.I enclose herewith the prescribed fee of Rs. 100/- for this subsequent nomination/revocation/variation.
Yours faithfully,
_________________________________
(Signature of Nominator)
Place : ______________
Date : ______________
For Office Use — Society's Endorsement
Revocation/variation recorded on _______. Earlier nomination dated _______ stands revoked/varied to the extent stated.
Register of Nominations updated at Sr. No. _______.
Signature of Secretary : _________________________
Page 19

@rajeshlovekar
FORM No. 15
[See Bye-laws 30(a) of the Bye-laws / Rule 106C-6(1)(a) — Official Form Y-4]
Application for Provisional Membership by Nominee
To,
The Secretary,
____________________________________________ Co-operative Housing Society Ltd.
____________________________________________________________________
Sir/Madam,
1.I, Shri/Smt. _________________________________________________, am the nominee of late
Shri/Smt. _________________________________________________, who was a Member of the
Society holding Share Certificate No. _______ for _______ fully paid-up shares in respect of Flat/Unit
No. _______ in the building known as ____________________________, and who expired on
__________, as evidenced by the Death Certificate enclosed.
2.I was nominated by the said deceased Member vide Nomination dated __________, recorded in the
Register of Nominations at Sr. No. _______.
3.Where there is more than one nominee: We, the nominees named in the said Nomination, have by joint
Affidavit/Declaration enclosed herewith, authorised Shri/Smt.
_________________________________________________ to be admitted as the Provisional Member
on our behalf.
4.I/We hereby apply, in accordance with Rule 106C-6(1)(a), to be admitted as a Provisional Member of the
Society, till the legal heirs of the deceased Member are brought on record, and enclose an Indemnity
Bond (Form No. 17) indemnifying the Society against any future claims in respect of the shares and
interest of the deceased Member.
5.I acknowledge that my admission as a Provisional Member shall not confer any ownership, title or
beneficial interest in the flat/unit, that my name shall not be entered on the Share Certificate, and that it
shall not affect the rights of the legal heirs or any other person claiming through the deceased Member.
Enclosures :
(1) Certified copy of the Death Certificate
(2) Certified copy of the recorded Nomination
(3) Joint Affidavit/Declaration of nominees authorising the applicant (where more than one nominee)
(4) Indemnity Bond (Form No. 17)
Yours faithfully,
_________________________________
(Signature of Applicant/Nominee)
Place : ______________
Date : ______________
For Office Use — Society's Endorsement
Admitted as Provisional Member vide Committee Resolution No. _______ dated _______, pending admission of legal heir(s)
as Member. Entered in the Register of Provisional Members at Sr. No. _______.
Signature of Secretary : _________________________
Page 20

@rajeshlovekar
FORM No. 16
[See Bye-laws 30(b) of the Bye-laws / Rule 106C-6(1)(b) — To be published in two local newspapers and displayed on
the Notice Board]
Public Notice — No Nomination (Invitation of Claims from Legal Heirs)
NOTICE
Shri/Smt. _________________________________________________, a Member of
____________________________ Co-operative Housing Society Ltd., holding Flat/Unit No. _______ in the
building known as ____________________________, expired on __________, without making any
nomination / without any nominee coming forward for admission as Provisional Member (strike out
whichever is not applicable).
The Society hereby invites claims or objections from the legal heirs or legal representatives of the deceased
Member, or from any other person claiming a right, title or interest in the shares and interest of the deceased
Member in the capital/property of the Society, within a period of _______ days from the date of publication
of this notice.
Claims/objections, if any, together with supporting documents, should be submitted in writing to the
Secretary of the Society at the address below within the said period, failing which the Society shall proceed to
admit as Provisional Member such legal heir(s) as may be determined in accordance with the Bye-laws and
the applicable law.
Address for submission of claims/objections :
____________________________________________________________
For and on behalf of ____________________________________________ Co-operative Housing Society Ltd.
Place : ______________ Date : ______________ Secretary
Page 21

@rajeshlovekar
FORM No. 17
[See Bye-laws 30 of the Bye-laws / Rule 106C-6 — Annexure to Forms 15, 18 and 19 — To be executed on stamp paper
of the requisite value]
Indemnity Bond (Nominee(s)/Legal Heir(s))
I/We, Shri/Smt./M/s. _________________________________________________, residing at
____________________________________________, do hereby solemnly affirm and state as follows:
1.That late Shri/Smt. _________________________________________________ was a Member of
____________________________ Co-operative Housing Society Ltd., holding Share Certificate No.
_______ for _______ fully paid-up shares in respect of Flat/Unit No. _______, and expired on
__________.
2.That I am/We are the nominee(s)/legal heir(s)/authorised legal heir (strike out whichever is not
applicable) entitled to seek admission as a Provisional Member/Member (strike out whichever is not
applicable) in respect of the shares and interest of the deceased Member.
3.That I/we hereby indemnify and keep indemnified the Society and its Office Bearers, Committee
Members and employees against any and all claims, demands, suits or other legal proceedings that may
be made or instituted by any other nominee, legal heir or person claiming through the deceased Member,
and against all costs, charges and expenses that the Society may incur in relation to any such claim,
demand, suit or proceeding.
4.That I/we make this declaration knowing that the Society admits me/us on the basis of, and in reliance
upon, this Indemnity Bond.
Signature of Deponent(s) : _________________________________
Place : ______________ Date : ______________
Witnesses:
1. Name & Address : _________________________________ Signature : _______________
2. Name & Address : _________________________________ Signature : _______________
Page 22

@rajeshlovekar
FORM No. 18
[See Bye-laws 31 of the Bye-laws / Rule 106C-6(2)(b) — Official Form Y-5]
Application for Membership via Family Arrangement
To,
The Secretary,
____________________________________________ Co-operative Housing Society Ltd.
____________________________________________________________________
Sir/Madam,
1.We, the legal heirs of late Shri/Smt. _________________________________________________, who
was a Member of the Society holding Share Certificate No. _______ for _______ fully paid-up shares in
respect of Flat/Unit No. _______ in the building known as ____________________________, and who
expired on __________, have entered into a duly stamped and registered Deed of Family Arrangement
dated __________ determining our respective shares, rights, title and interest in the said flat/unit and the
shares and interest in the capital/property of the Society.
2.In accordance with the said Deed of Family Arrangement, we apply for admission of Shri/Smt.
_________________________________________________ as a Member of the Society in respect of the
said Flat/Unit.
3.We enclose the original/certified copy of the Deed of Family Arrangement, an Indemnity Bond (Form
No. 17) indemnifying the Society against any future claims, and the original Share Certificate.
Enclosures :
(1) Original/certified copy of the registered Deed of Family Arrangement
(2) Indemnity Bond (Form No. 17)
(3) Original Share Certificate
(4) Death Certificate of the deceased Member
Signatures of all Legal Heirs executing the Family Arrangement :
1. _________________________ 2. _________________________ 3. _________________________
Place : ______________ Date : ______________
For Office Use — Society's Endorsement
Public notice issued (Form No. 19) on _______; no claims/objections received / claims received and referred to Court (strike
out whichever is not applicable). Admitted as Member vide Committee Resolution No. _______ dated _______. Register of I, J
and Shares updated at Sr. No. _______; Provisional Membership, if any, ceased with effect from the said date.
Signature of Secretary : _________________________
Page 23

@rajeshlovekar
FORM No. 19
[See Bye-laws 31(c) of the Bye-laws — To be displayed on the Notice Board and/or published as the Committee may
direct]
Public Notice — Family Arrangement (Invitation of Claims/Objections)
NOTICE
Notice is hereby given that Shri/Smt./M/s. _________________________________________________ have
applied for transfer of the shares and interest of late Shri/Smt.
_________________________________________________ (deceased Member) in respect of Flat/Unit No.
_______ in the building known as ____________________________, on the basis of a registered Deed of
Family Arrangement dated __________.
Any person claiming any right, title or interest in the said shares and interest, or having any objection to the
proposed transfer, is requested to submit the same in writing to the Secretary of the Society, with supporting
documents, within _______ days from the date of this notice, failing which the Society shall proceed to
consider the application on merits.
For and on behalf of ____________________________________________ Co-operative Housing Society Ltd.
Place : ______________ Date : ______________ Secretary
Page 24

@rajeshlovekar
FORM No. 20
[See Bye-laws 32 of the Bye-laws / Rule 106C-6]
Application for Membership via Succession Document
To,
The Secretary,
____________________________________________ Co-operative Housing Society Ltd.
____________________________________________________________________
Sir/Madam,
1.I/We, Shri/Smt./M/s. _________________________________________________, apply for admission
as Member(s) in respect of the shares and interest of late Shri/Smt.
_________________________________________________ (deceased Member), who held Share
Certificate No. _______ for _______ fully paid-up shares in respect of Flat/Unit No. _______ in the
building known as ____________________________, on the basis of [tick whichever is applicable:]
☐a Will / Probate of the Will dated __________ issued by ____________________________;
☐a Succession Certificate dated __________ issued by ____________________________;
☐a Legal Heirship Certificate dated __________ issued by ____________________________;
☐Letters of Administration dated __________;
☐a Decree/Order of the Court dated __________ in ____________________________.
2.We are aware that the Society shall not adjudicate any dispute relating to the validity, interpretation or
legal effect of the above document, and that any person disputing the same must obtain appropriate orders
from the competent Court.
3.We enclose the original/certified copy of the succession document, an Indemnity Bond (Form No. 17),
and the original Share Certificate.
Enclosures :
(1) Original/certified copy of the succession document relied upon
(2) Indemnity Bond (Form No. 17)
(3) Original Share Certificate
Yours faithfully,
_________________________________
(Signature/s of Applicant(s))
Place : ______________
Date : ______________
For Office Use — Society's Endorsement
Documents verified. Admitted as Member vide Committee Resolution No. _______ dated _______. Register of I, J and Shares
updated at Sr. No. _______.
Signature of Secretary : _________________________
Page 25

@rajeshlovekar
FORM No. 21
[See Bye-laws 33(g) of the Bye-laws — Society's Letter to the Transferee]
Intimation of Exercise of Membership Rights by Transferee
To,
Shri/Smt./M/s. _________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________
Subject : Admission as Member and endorsement/issue of Share Certificate.
Sir/Madam,
1.Upon acceptance of the application for transfer of shares and interest of Shri/Smt./M/s.
_________________________________________________ in the capital/property of the Society, in
your favour, and upon acceptance of your application for Membership, the General Body/Committee
(strike out whichever is not applicable) in its meeting held on __________ has approved your admission
as a Member of the Society in respect of Flat/Unit No. _______.
2.Your name has accordingly been entered in the Register of Members ('I' Form) and the List of Members
('J' Form) at Sr. No. _______, and the necessary endorsement of transfer has been made in the Society's
records.
3.You are entitled, from the date of this letter, to exercise the rights of Membership in accordance with the
Act, the Rules and the Bye-laws of the Society. The endorsed/fresh Share Certificate No. _______ is
enclosed herewith.
Yours faithfully,
_________________________________
Secretary
For and on behalf of ____________________________________________ Co-operative Housing Society Ltd.
Encl.: Share Certificate
Page 26

@rajeshlovekar
CHAPTER IX — MAINTENANCE, REPAIRS, ALTERATIONS AND
OCCUPATION OF FLATS
Forms 22 to 24 — Drafted for Adoption with the Bye-laws, 2026 (Revised per Corrections)
Prepared per the approved Chapter-wise Forms Checklist, as corrected — Counter-Expert Report (formerly Form 27) is not
required and has been removed
22 — Complaint/Report of Repairs Required
23 — Application for Permission — Repairs/Renovation/Alterations
24 — Leakage/Seepage Complaint & Source Determination Form
Page 27

@rajeshlovekar
FORM No. 22
[See Bye-laws 47 of the Bye-laws]
Complaint / Report of Repairs Required
To,
The Secretary,
____________________________________________ Co-operative Housing Society Ltd.
____________________________________________________________________
Sir/Madam,
1.I, Shri/Smt. _________________________________________________, Member holding Flat/Unit No.
_______ in the building known as ____________________________, bring to the notice of the
Society/Committee the following repair issue(s) requiring attention:
Nature of the repair/defect _________________________________________________
Location (common area / flat / specify) _________________________________________________
Date first noticed _________________________________________________
Urgency (Routine / Urgent / Emergency) _________________________________________________
2.I request that the Society inspect the said area, either personally through the Secretary or through a
qualified Architect/Structural Engineer/Technical Expert as the Committee may deem fit, and determine
whether the repair is a Society-cost item under Bye-law No. 45 or a Member-cost item under Bye-law
No. 46.
3.I undertake to permit access to my flat/unit, where necessary, for the purpose of such inspection, upon
reasonable prior intimation, except in cases of emergency.
Enclosures :
(1) Photographs of the defect/damage, if available
(2) Any other supporting document
Yours faithfully,
_________________________________
(Signature of Applicant)
Place : ______________
Date : ______________
For Office Use — Society's Endorsement
Complaint received and logged on _______. Inspection carried out on _______ by _______ (Secretary/Architect/Structural
Engineer, as applicable). Responsibility determined as Society-cost/Member-cost under Bye-law No. 45/46 (strike out
whichever is not applicable). Action taken: _______________________________.
Signature of Secretary : _________________________
Page 28

@rajeshlovekar
FORM No. 23
[See Bye-laws 48 of the Bye-laws]
Application for Permission — Repairs, Renovation & Alterations
To,
The Secretary,
____________________________________________ Co-operative Housing Society Ltd.
____________________________________________________________________
Sir/Madam,
Note: Permission under this Form is required only where the proposed work involves any structural alteration, modification of
structural members, alteration of the approved plan or elevation, or any change affecting common areas, common facilities,
common amenities, common services, waterproofing, external façade, fire safety systems or utility services. Ordinary internal
repairs (painting, flooring, sanitary fittings, kitchen platform, doors/windows, electrical points, plumbing fittings and similar
non-structural work) do NOT require this application.
1.I, Shri/Smt. _________________________________________________, Member holding Flat/Unit No.
_______ in the building known as ____________________________, propose to carry out the following
work:
Nature and extent of the proposed work _________________________________________________
_________________________________________________
Reason for the work_________________________________________________
Proposed contractor (if engaged) _________________________________________________
2.I enclose herewith the plans/drawings and a structural stability certificate from a qualified Structural
Engineer, wherever applicable, confirming that the proposed work will not adversely affect the structural
stability of the building or the safety of other Members.
3.I undertake to be responsible for any damage caused to the building, common property, common services
or any other flat/unit during execution of this work, and to restore/compensate the same at my own cost.
4.I am aware that the Committee shall communicate its decision in writing within thirty days from the date
of receipt of this complete application, and that permission shall not be unreasonably withheld where the
proposed work complies with the Act, the Rules, the Bye-laws and applicable law.
Enclosures :
(1) Plans/drawings of the proposed work
(2) Structural stability certificate (where applicable)
(3) Any statutory permission/NOC required under other laws
Yours faithfully,
_________________________________
(Signature of Applicant)
Place : ______________
Date : ______________
For Office Use — Society's Endorsement
Application received on _______. Technical opinion obtained from _______ on _______ (where applicable). Permission
granted/refused on _______ [if refused, reasons recorded separately]. Communicated to the Member on _______, within the
30-day period prescribed under Bye-law No. 48(e).
Page 29

@rajeshlovekar
Signature of Secretary : _________________________
Page 30

@rajeshlovekar
FORM No. 24
[See Bye-laws 49 of the Bye-laws]
Leakage / Seepage Complaint & Source Determination Form
To,
The Secretary,
____________________________________________ Co-operative Housing Society Ltd.
____________________________________________________________________
Sir/Madam,
1.I, Shri/Smt. _________________________________________________, Member holding Flat/Unit No.
_______ in the building known as ____________________________, report leakage/seepage/dampness
(strike out whichever is not applicable) affecting my flat/unit, as detailed below:
Location of leakage/seepage_________________________________________________
Suspected source (if known)_________________________________________________
Date first noticed _________________________________________________
Extent of damage, if any _________________________________________________
2.I request that the Committee cause an inspection to be carried out in accordance with Bye-law No. 47 of
the Bye-laws, to determine whether the source of the leakage/seepage is the common structure of the
building or the internal plumbing/fittings for which I, or the Member of the flat/unit above/adjoining, am
responsible.
Enclosures :
(1) Photographs of the affected area
(2) Any other supporting document
Yours faithfully,
_________________________________
(Signature of Applicant)
Place : ______________
Date : ______________
For Office Use — Society's Determination of Source and Responsibility
Inspection carried out on _______ by _______. Source of leakage/seepage determined to be:
☐Common structure — repairs to be carried out by the Society at its cost.
☐Internal plumbing/fittings of Flat/Unit No. _______ — repairs to be carried out by the Member at his/her
cost.
☐Shared responsibility — apportioned as follows:
_________________________________________________
Signature of Secretary : _________________________
Page 31

@rajeshlovekar
CHAPTER XII — PARKING, VEHICLE MANAGEMENT AND ELECTRIC
VEHICLE CHARGING SYSTEMS
Forms 25 to 29 — Drafted for Adoption with the Bye-laws, 2026
Prepared per the approved Chapter-wise Forms Checklist
25 — Application for Allotment of Parking Space
26 — Application for Additional Parking Space (Waiting List)
27 — Voluntary Surrender of Parking Space
28 — Application for Installation of Private Electric Vehicle Charging Facility
29 — EV Installation Compliance/Inspection Checklist
Page 32

@rajeshlovekar
FORM No. 25
[See Bye-laws 79 of the Bye-laws]
Application for Allotment of Parking Space
To,
The Secretary,
____________________________________________ Co-operative Housing Society Ltd.
____________________________________________________________________
Sir/Madam,
1.I, Shri/Smt. _________________________________________________, Member holding Flat/Unit No.
_______ in the building known as ____________________________, request allotment of a parking
space in accordance with Rule 79 of the Bye-laws and the Parking Policy approved by the General Body.
Type of parking space preferred (Open/Stilt/Covered/Garage/Stack)
_________________________________________________
Registration number of the vehicle proposed to be parked, if available
_________________________________________________
Name of the owner/user of the vehicle (Member/Joint Member/Associate Member/family
member/tenant/licensee, as applicable) _________________________________________________
2.I confirm that this is my first application for allotment of parking space to this flat/unit, and that I am
aware that, subject to availability, one parking space shall ordinarily be allotted to one flat/unit in the first
instance.
3.I undertake to intimate the Society in writing or by electronic means of any change in the registration
number of the vehicle parked in the allotted space, and to use the parking space strictly in accordance
with the Bye-laws and the Parking Policy of the Society.
4.I am aware that the vehicle parked in the allotted parking space need not be registered in my name and
may belong to or be lawfully used by any person lawfully occupying or authorised to use the flat/unit, and
I confirm that this application is made accordingly.
Enclosures :
(1) Copy of the Registration Certificate of the vehicle, if available (not mandatory)
(2) Any other document in support of eligibility
Yours faithfully,
_________________________________
(Signature of Applicant/Member)
Place : ______________
Date : ______________
For Office Use — Society's Endorsement
Application received on _______. Parking space allotted: Yes/No. If yes, Parking Space No. _______, type _______, entered
in the Parking Register on _______. If not allotted for want of availability, applicant placed on the waiting list at Sr. No.
_______ (see Form No. 34).
Signature of Secretary : _________________________
Page 33

@rajeshlovekar
FORM No. 26
[See Bye-laws 79(g) of the Bye-laws]
Application for Additional Parking Space (Waiting List)
To,
The Secretary,
____________________________________________ Co-operative Housing Society Ltd.
____________________________________________________________________
Sir/Madam,
1.I, Shri/Smt. _________________________________________________, Member holding Flat/Unit No.
_______ in the building known as ____________________________, having already been allotted one
parking space bearing No. _______, request allotment of an additional/second parking space, subject to
availability and in accordance with Rule 79(d) and the Parking Policy of the Society.
Type of additional parking space preferred _________________________________________________
Registration number of the additional vehicle, if available
_________________________________________________
2.I am aware that additional parking, where available in excess after satisfying eligible Members requiring
one parking space, may be allotted only on a temporary or yearly basis as per the Parking Policy
approved by the General Body, and does not confer any permanent or proprietary right.
3.I am aware that where the number of applicants for available parking spaces exceeds the number of such
spaces, allotment shall be made by a fair and transparent method such as draw of lots, rotation or any
other method approved by the General Body, and I agree to abide by the outcome of such method.
4.I request that, in the event a parking space is not immediately available, my name be entered on the
waiting list maintained by the Society, to be considered in due chronological order as and when a space
becomes available by surrender, cancellation, transfer or otherwise.
Enclosures :
(1) Copy of the Registration Certificate of the additional vehicle, if available
Yours faithfully,
_________________________________
(Signature of Applicant/Member)
Place : ______________
Date : ______________
For Office Use — Society's Endorsement
Application received on _______. Additional parking space available: Yes/No. If yes, allotted by [draw of lots/rotation/other
method approved by the General Body — specify] on _______, Parking Space No. _______ allotted on a temporary/yearly
basis, entered in the Parking Register. If not available, entered on the Waiting List at Sr. No. _______ on _______.
Signature of Secretary : _________________________
Page 34

@rajeshlovekar
FORM No. 27
[See Bye-laws 82(a) of the Bye-laws]
Voluntary Surrender of Parking Space
To,
The Secretary,
____________________________________________ Co-operative Housing Society Ltd.
____________________________________________________________________
Sir/Madam,
1.I, Shri/Smt. _________________________________________________, Member holding Flat/Unit No.
_______ in the building known as ____________________________, having been allotted Parking
Space No. _______ (type: _______), hereby voluntarily surrender the said parking space with effect from
__________.
Reason for surrender (optional) _________________________________________________
2.I confirm that I have removed my vehicle and all belongings from the said parking space and have
handed over vacant and peaceful possession thereof to the Society as on the date of this intimation.
3.I am aware that upon such surrender, the Society may re-allot the said parking space in accordance with
the Bye-laws and the Parking Policy, ordinarily from the waiting list maintained by the Society, and that
such surrender shall not affect my liability to pay any outstanding parking charges or other dues payable
to the Society up to the date of surrender.
Yours faithfully,
_________________________________
(Signature of Member surrendering the parking space)
Place : ______________
Date : ______________
For Office Use — Society's Endorsement
Surrender received and possession resumed on _______. Parking Register updated on _______. Parking Space No. _______
re-allotted to Flat/Unit No. _______ from the Waiting List (Sr. No. _______) on _______, in accordance with Rule 82(e)-(f) of
the Bye-laws. Outstanding dues, if any, up to the date of surrender: _______________________________.
Signature of Secretary : _________________________
Page 35

@rajeshlovekar
FORM No. 28
[See Bye-laws 83(a)-(c) of the Bye-laws]
Application for Installation of Private Electric Vehicle Charging Facility
To,
The Secretary,
____________________________________________ Co-operative Housing Society Ltd.
____________________________________________________________________
Sir/Madam,
Note: This application does not require approval of the General Body. The Society shall issue the required No Objection
Certificate/permission within the period prescribed by the Government and shall not withhold or refuse the same except for
reasons relating to non-compliance with applicable law, safety standards or the Bye-laws.
1.I, Shri/Smt. _________________________________________________, Member holding Flat/Unit No.
_______ in the building known as ____________________________, propose to install a private Electric
Vehicle (EV) charging facility at Parking Space No. _______ lawfully allotted to/available for use by me,
and furnish the following particulars in accordance with Rule 83(c) of the Bye-laws:
(a) Details of the parking space (location, type, number)
_________________________________________________
(b) Specifications of the charging equipment (make, model, capacity in kW)
_________________________________________________
(c) Details of electrical load and source of supply
_________________________________________________
(d) Layout of cabling and electrical installation (attached as Annexure, wherever required)
_________________________________________________
(e) Name and licence number of the licensed electrical contractor engaged
_________________________________________________
2.I undertake to comply with all applicable electrical, fire safety and statutory requirements, and confirm
that the installation shall be carried out only through the above-named licensed electrical contractor using
approved equipment, in accordance with Rule 83(e) of the Bye-laws.
3.I undertake to bear the entire cost of electrical load augmentation, dedicated meter, cabling, charging
equipment, installation, civil works, testing, commissioning, operation, maintenance, repairs,
replacement, electricity consumption, statutory approvals and removal (wherever required), as provided
in Rule 83(d).
4.I confirm that the proposed installation shall not obstruct any common area, internal road, fire exit or
emergency access; shall not adversely affect the structural stability of the building; shall not interfere with
common electrical installations or essential services; and shall not create any electrical, fire or public
safety hazard, nuisance, inconvenience or damage, as required under Rule 83(f).
5.I agree to indemnify and keep indemnified the Society against all claims, losses, liabilities, damages,
costs and expenses arising out of this installation or its use, in accordance with Rule 83(k), and to permit
inspection of the installation by the Society, after reasonable notice, for verifying compliance with
applicable safety standards and the Bye-laws.
Enclosures :
(1) Layout/cabling diagram and technical specifications of the charging equipment
(2) Undertaking to comply with applicable electrical, fire safety and statutory requirements
(3) Licence/registration proof of the electrical contractor engaged
Page 36

@rajeshlovekar
Yours faithfully,
_________________________________
(Signature of Applicant/Member)
Place : ______________
Date : ______________
For Office Use — Society's Endorsement
Application received on _______, found complete on _______. No Objection Certificate/permission issued on _______, being
within the period prescribed by the Government under Rule 83(b) [OR refused on _______ for reasons recorded:
_______________________________, relating solely to non-compliance with applicable law/safety standards/the Bye-laws].
Signature of Secretary : _________________________
Page 37

@rajeshlovekar
FORM No. 29
[See Bye-laws 83(g) of the Bye-laws]
EV Installation Compliance / Inspection Checklist
(For use by the Society while carrying out a post-installation or periodic inspection of a private Electric Vehicle charging
facility, solely for the purpose of verifying compliance with applicable safety standards and the Bye-laws.)
1.Particulars of the installation
Flat/Unit No. and name of Member _________________________________________________
Parking Space No._________________________________________________
Date of original NOC/permission (Form No. 28)
_________________________________________________
Date of this inspection _________________________________________________
2.Compliance checklist
☐Installation carried out through the licensed electrical contractor named in the application
☐Charging equipment matches the specifications furnished in the application
☐Electrical load and dedicated metering arrangement conform to the sanctioned particulars
☐Cabling and installation conform to the layout furnished and applicable electrical safety standards
☐No obstruction to common area, internal road, fire exit or emergency access
☐No adverse effect on structural stability of the building
☐No interference with common electrical installations or essential services
☐No electrical, fire or public safety hazard, nuisance, inconvenience or damage observed
☐Fire safety and statutory requirements complied with (as applicable)
3.Findings and directions
Defects/unsafe conditions noticed, if any _________________________________________________
Rectification directed, with time allowed _________________________________________________
Overall status Compliant Non-compliant — rectification directed ☐☐
Suspended/disconnected under Rule 83(h) ☐
Certification
Inspected by (Secretary/Committee Member/Technical Expert engaged by the Society):
_________________________________
This inspection has been carried out solely to verify compliance with applicable safety standards and the Bye-laws, and does
not confer upon the Society any liability for the installation, its operation or maintenance, which remains solely that of the
Member under Rule 83(d), (j) and (k).
Signature of Secretary : _________________________
Copy to the Member concerned, with rectification directions, if any.
Page 38

@rajeshlovekar
CHAPTER XX — REDRESSAL OF MEMBERS' COMPLAINTS AND
GRIEVANCE MANAGEMENT
Forms 30 to 31 — Drafted for Adoption with the Bye-laws, 2026
Prepared per the approved Chapter-wise Forms Checklist
30 — Member Complaint Application
52 — Referral to / Application before the Grievance Redressal Committee
Page 39

@rajeshlovekar
FORM No. 30
[See Bye-laws 184 of the Bye-laws]
Member Complaint Application
To,
The Secretary / Chairman / Treasurer (any Office Bearer),
____________________________________________ Co-operative Housing Society Ltd.
____________________________________________________________________
Sir/Madam,
1.I, Shri/Smt. _________________________________________________, Member holding Flat/Unit No.
_______ in the building known as ____________________________, hereby submit the following
complaint for consideration by the Society:
Nature of the grievance _________________________________________________
Facts of the case _________________________________________________
_________________________________________________
Relief sought _________________________________________________
2.I confirm that all undisputed dues payable by me to the Society, including maintenance charges, have
been paid up to date.
Provided that, where the Member disputes the correctness or legality of any dues demanded by the Society, such dispute
may be raised separately in accordance with law, and this complaint shall not, for that reason alone, be treated as non-
maintainable. [Tick if applicable:]
☐I dispute the correctness/legality of certain dues, particulars of which are set out separately below, and
request that this complaint be considered notwithstanding such dispute, in accordance with the proviso to
Rule 184(c).
Particulars of disputed dues (if applicable) _________________________________________________
3.I request that this complaint be entered in the Complaint Register, acknowledged, and disposed of in
accordance with Rules 185 and 186 of the Bye-laws.
Enclosures :
(1) Supporting documents relevant to the complaint (specify): _________________________________
(2) Photographs, if any
Yours faithfully,
_________________________________
(Signature of Member)
Place : ______________
Date : ______________
For Office Use — Society's Endorsement
Complaint received and entered in the Complaint Register at Sr. No. _______ on _______. Acknowledgment issued to the
Member on _______ (within 3 days, per Rule 185(b)), indicating expected disposal by _______. Placed before the Managing
Committee Meeting held on _______. Decision: _______________________________. Communicated to the Member on
_______ [within 15 days of the Committee Meeting, or within 7 days if an urgent matter under Rule 186(d)(ii)].
Signature of Secretary : _________________________
Page 40

@rajeshlovekar
FORM No. 31
[See Bye-laws 187 of the Bye-laws — applicable only to Societies having more than 50 Members and having constituted
a Grievance Redressal Committee]
Referral to / Application before the Grievance Redressal Committee
Part A — To be completed by the Managing Committee, referring a complaint to the Grievance Redressal
Committee
1.The following complaint, received from Shri/Smt.
_________________________________________________, Member holding Flat/Unit No. _______,
vide Complaint dated __________ (Form No. 51, Sr. No. _______ in the Complaint Register), is referred
to the Grievance Redressal Committee constituted by the General Body vide Resolution dated
__________, for examination in accordance with Rule 187 of the Bye-laws.
Brief nature of the complaint_________________________________________________
Reason for referral to the Grievance Redressal Committee
_________________________________________________
Referred by (Chairman/Secretary, on behalf of the Managing Committee) :
_________________________________
Date of referral : ______________
Part B — To be completed by the Grievance Redressal Committee
1.The Grievance Redressal Committee, consisting of (i) one Member of the Managing Committee, (ii) two
Members of the Society who are not members of the Managing Committee, and (iii) any other person
considered necessary by the General Body, as constituted below, has examined the complaint referred in
Part A above.
(i) Managing Committee Member _________________________________________________
(ii) Society Member (not on the Managing Committee)
_________________________________________________
(ii) Society Member (not on the Managing Committee)
_________________________________________________
(iii) Other person, if any _________________________________________________
2.Hearing was given to the concerned parties on __________, and an attempt at amicable settlement was
made in accordance with Rule 187(c).
3.Outcome of the amicable settlement attempt: [tick whichever is applicable]
☐Amicably settled — terms of settlement recorded below.
☐Not settled — recommendation to the Managing Committee recorded below.
Terms of settlement / Recommendation to the Managing Committee
_________________________________________________
_________________________________________________
Signatures of the Grievance Redressal Committee Members :
1. _________________________ 2. _________________________ 3. _________________________
Date of recommendation : ______________
Part C — Managing Committee's Decision on the Recommendation
Page 41

@rajeshlovekar
The Managing Committee has considered the recommendation of the Grievance Redressal Committee set out in
Part B above, and records its decision as follows, in accordance with Rule 187(d):
☐Recommendation accepted in full.
☐Recommendation accepted in part / modified, as follows:
_________________________________________________
☐Recommendation not accepted, for the reasons recorded below (mandatory where the Committee
disagrees with the recommendation):
Reasons for disagreement, if any _________________________________________________
For Office Use — Society's Endorsement
Decision communicated to the Member on _______. Recorded in the Minutes of the Committee Meeting held on _______ and
in the Complaint Register against Sr. No. _______.
Signature of Secretary : _________________________
Page 42