No. 1 301 510212012-Credit ll
Government of India
Ministry of Agriculture
Department of Agriculture & Cooperation
Krishi Bhavan, New Delhi
Dated the 4th February, 2014
To
1. The Chief Secretary,
Government of -------
2. The CMD / MD / CEO of
Subject: National Grop Insurance Programme (NCIP) - issue of Operational
Guidelines
Sir,
I am directed to refer to this Department's letter of even number dated 1st
November, 2013 wherein Administrative instructions for implementation of NCIP
were issued. The detailed Operational Guidelines are enclosed for implementation
of the scheme. Soft copy of these guidelines has also been uploaded on the
website of the Department of Agriculture & Cooperation www.agricoop.nic.in.
2. This has the approval of competent authority.
Yours faithfully
\Iq-
(Dr. Ashish Kufiar Bhutani)
Joint Secretary to the Govt. of India

National Crop Insurance Programme
(NCIP)
Operational Guidelines
For Xll Five Year Plan
Gredit Division
Department of Agriculture & Gooperation
Ministry of Agriculture
Government of India
January 20'|4

CONTENTS
Sl. No. NCIP Comoonents Paqe
I Modified National Agricultural lnsurance
Scheme (MNAIS)
1-32
2 Weather Based Crop lnsurance Scheme
(WBCIS)
33-60
3 Coconut Palm lnsurance Scheme (CPIS) 61-69
4 Annexure 70-85

National Crop Insurance Programme (NCIP)
F. No 13015//02/2012-Credit-II Operational Guidelines
1

Component-I: Modified National Agricultural Insurance Scheme (MNAIS)

1. NATURE OF THE SCHEME

1.1 Modified National Agricultural Insurance Scheme (MNAIS) aims at
supporting sustainable production in agriculture sector, thereby ensuring
food security, crop diversification and enhancing growth and
competitiveness of agriculture sector besides protecting farmers from
production risks.

2. PARTICIPATING INSURANCE COMPANY

2.1 The public sector and private sector General Insurance Companies
empanelled by the Department of Agriculture & Cooperation (DAC),
Government of India and selected by concerned State Government / Union
Territory (UT) implement MNAIS. The Insurance Companies mainly
engaged in agriculture/rural insurance business and having adequate
experience, infrastructure, financial strength and operational capabilities are
empanelled by DAC. However, selection of insurance company from
amongst the empanelled insurance companies, is done by the concerned
State Government for implementation of MNAIS in their State. In case the
State intends to use services of more than one insurance company, State
Government may ensure that only one insurance company operates in each
district or notified area for loanee farmers. However, more than one
insurance company can be permitted to implement the scheme in a district
for non-loanee farmers.

2.2 The participating companies should have requisite approval of Insurance
Regulatory and Development Authority (IRDA) to underwrite insurance
business under the Scheme apart from fulfilling other statutory
requirements.

2.3 At the beginning of each crop season, the empanelled insurance companies
are required to submit the Prospective Plan covering details about their
financial strength, infrastructure, solvency margin, business plan for the
season, marketing channel, human resources and strategies for covering
the farmers, alongwith details about the proposed yield-index products etc to
the concerned State Government under intimation to DAC.

2.4 The performance of the empanelled insurance companies shall be closely
monitored by DAC through the indicators (i) Percentage of claims to total
premium amount of which desirable minimum level for the crop season is
60% and for the last seven crop seasons is average 80% with 60% weight
age (ii) Percentage of number of farmers benefitted to farmers insured of

National Crop Insurance Programme (NCIP)
F. No 13015//02/2012-Credit-II Operational Guidelines
2

which desirable minimum level is 33% with 20% weight age (iii) Percentage
of non-loanee farmers to total number of insured farmers etc. of which
desirable minimum level is 50% with 20% weight age. If the performance is
found below par, the said insurance company is liable to be de-empanelled.

3. SCHEME ACCEPTANCE BY THE STATE GOVERNMENT

3.1 Consent for Scheme –State Government / UT, intending to participate in
MNAIS should intimate their consent to DAC in writing and this consent will
imply acceptance by State Government /UT of all provisions, modalities and
guidelines of MNAIS as laid out in the Scheme. Conditions relating to
MNAIS which are binding on States/UTs, are as follows:

i) State has to conduct requisite number of Crop Cutting Experiments
(CCEs) at the level of notified insurance unit area;
ii) CCE based yield data will be submitted to insurance companywithin
the prescribed time limit;
iii) State/UT will make necessary budgetary provision in State/UT
budget, to release premium subsidy based on fair estimates, at the
beginning of the crop season;
iv) State/UT should be willing to facilitate strengthening of weather
station network in the districts .

3.2 Nodal Department of State Government –Department of State
Government already looking after implementation of erstwhile National
Agriculture Insurance Scheme(NAIS)/Pilot MNAIS / Weather Based Crop
Insurance Scheme (WBCIS) may be designated as Nodal Department for
implementation of MNAIS component of NCIP.

3.3 Authorization to State Level Coordination Committee on Crop
Insurance (SLCCCI) – The SLCCCI presently overseeing implementation
of erstwhile NAIS is authorized to oversee implementation of MNAIS. The
States/UTs which have not implemented the erstwhile NAIS shall constitute
SLCCCI for implementation of MNAIS on the lines similar to that of
erstwhile NAIS.

3.4 Composition of SLCCCI – The present composition of SLCCCI may be
strengthened by including representatives from State Horticulture Dept.,
State Remote Sensing Application Centre, India Meteorological Department
(IMD), Farmers’ Representatives and Empanelled Insurance Companies
for implementing MNAIS. Chairman of SLCCCI shall co-opt representatives
from other departments / agencies, if considered necessary.

National Crop Insurance Programme (NCIP)
F. No 13015//02/2012-Credit-II Operational Guidelines
3

4. CROPS COVERAGE

I. Food crops (Cereals, Millets & Pulses),
II. Oilseeds
III. Annual Commercial / Horticultural crops

5. FARMERS COVERED

5.1. All farmers including sharecroppers and tenant farmers growing the notified
crops in the notified areas are eligible for coverage.

5.2. However, farmers should have insurable interest on the insured crops. The non-
loanee farmers are required to submit necessary documentary evidence of land
records and / or applicable contract/agreement details (in case of
sharecroppers/tenant farmers).

5.3 Compulsory Component

All farmers availing Seasonal Agricultural Operations (SAO) loans from
Financial Institutions (i.e. loanee farmers)for the crop(s) notified would be
covered compulsorily.

5.4 Voluntary Component

The Scheme would be optional for the non-loanee farmers.

5.5 Both MNAIS and WBCIS components of NCIP can be implemented for non-
loanee farmers in the area(s) notified for MNAIS and non-loanee farmers can
choose between MNAIS and WBCIS, and also insurance companies.

5.6 Special efforts shall be made to ensure the maximum coverage of
SC/ST/Women farmers under the scheme. Budget allocation and utilization
under these segments of farmers shoul d be in proportion to SC/ST/Women
population in the respective state.

5.7 Panchayat Raj Institutions (PRIs) may be involved at various stages of
implementation of crop insurance schemes particularly in the identification of
the crops & beneficiaries, extension & awareness creation amongst farmers,
obtaining feed-back of the farmers etc.

6. RISK COVERED& EXLUSIONS

6.1 Following stages of the crop and risks leading to crop loss,are covered under
the scheme.

National Crop Insurance Programme (NCIP)
F. No 13015//02/2012-Credit-II Operational Guidelines
4

a) Prevented Sowing/Planting Risk: Insured area is prevented from
sowing/ planting due to deficit rainfall or adverse seasonal conditions
b) Standing Crop (Sowing to Harvesting): Comprehensive risk insurance
is provided to cover yield losses due to non- preventable risk, viz.:
Drought, Dry spells, Flood, Inundation, Pests & Diseases, Landslides,
Natural Fire & Lightening, Storm, Hailstorm, Cyclone, Typhoon,
Tempest, Hurricane, Tornado etc.
c) Post Harvest Losses: coverage is available only upto a maximum
period of two weeks from harvesting for those crops which are allowed
to dry in the field after harvesting against specific perils of cyclonic
rains.
6.2. General Exclusions: Losses arising out of war & nuclear risks, malicious
damage and other preventable risks shall be excluded.

7. NOTIFICATION:

7.1 Prior to the commencement of each season, preferably in the beginning of
March for Kharif and in the beginnin g of September for Rabi season,
meeting of SLCCCI should be convened for issuing notification for the
season, and State Government / UT should ensure issuance of the
notification and its circulation to all concerned agencies / departments /
institutionsatleast one month in advance of the commencement of the crop
season.

7.2 Notification of crops and areas:

7.2.1 The Scheme shall operate on the principle of “Area Approach” in the
selected Defined Areas called Insurance Unit (IU). State Government /UT
will notify Crops and Defined Areas covered during the season in
accordance with decision taken in the meeting of SLCCCI. State/UT
Government should notify as an insu rance unit, Village/Village Panchayat
or any other equivalent unit for major crops. For other crops it may be a
unit of size in between Village Panchayat and Taluka / Block, as decided
by State/UT Government.

7.2.2 SLCCCI will, for the purpose of notif ication, consider factors such as
availability of past yield data based on CCEs for adequate number of
years, cropped acreage and ability to conduct requisite number of CCEs
for estimating yield during proposed season, etc.

7.2.3 States which are initially unable to implement MNAIS at village/village
panchayat level are allowed to implement it at higher unit area level (upto
a cluster of maximum 15 villages) with prior approval of DAC for 3-5
years.

National Crop Insurance Programme (NCIP)
F. No 13015//02/2012-Credit-II Operational Guidelines
5

7.2.4 States implementing MNAIS at village/village panchayat level are entitled
for 50% reimbursement of expenses of the additional (incremental) CCEs
from DAC subject to a cap.

7.2.5 State Government/UT should provide 10 years historical yield data to
Insurance Companies for fixing indemnity limits, threshold yield, setting
premium rates, etc. However, for purpose of calculation of premium rates
at village panchayat or other equivalent units, availability of five years data
at that level is desirable. In absence of above, data at next higher unit /
nearest neighbouring unit / weighted average of contiguous units as
decided by the SLCCCI, shall be used.

7.2.6 In case it is proposed to notify irrigated & un-irrigated areas separately
under a crop, State Government / UT shall ensure that minimum CCEs are
planned & conducted for irrigated & un-irrigated crops, separately in such
areas. In addition, past yield data for adequate number of years will have
to be made available separately.

7.3 Notification of indemnity level:

7.3.1 Two level of Indemnity, viz., 90% & 80% corresponding to risk level of the
areas shall be available for all crops.

7.3.2 SLCCCI based on proposals subm itted by Insurance Companies shall
approve indemnity levels for notified crops and areas at sub-district or
district level.

7.4 Notification of calamity year(s), if any for excluding the same from
calculation of threshold yield:

7.4.1 If the State Government/UT declares calamity year(s), if any, in respect of
any district/area based on decision/notification made for that year by
concerned Government/competent authority, such calamity year(s) will be
excluded while calculating threshold yield at insurance unit level, and also
‘Notional Threshold Yield’ at sub-district / district level for purpose of
computation of sum insured (value of threshold yield of average yield). Not
more than two such years shall be excluded from calculation of threshold
yield and sum insured, even in instances where calamity years are more
than two during the preceding seven years.

7.5 Selection of Insurance Company:

7.5.1 Insurance provider(s) shall be selected through a transparent process,
strictly on the basis of experience, relevance of the insurance product and
the overall benefits of the product, premium rate, existence of

National Crop Insurance Programme (NCIP)
F. No 13015//02/2012-Credit-II Operational Guidelines
6

infrastructure and quality of services like coverage of farmers & area,
payouts in terms of quantum & timely settlement thereof, willingness to do
publicity & awareness campaigns etc. States should select only those
insurance companies who provide the best value for the premium.

7.5.2 State Govt., to the extent possible ,may invite all the empanelled insurance
companies to submit the premium rates at sub-district / district level both at
80% and 90% or at the level indicated, alongwith Threshold Yields, Sum
Insured etc. for the season. Such products are evaluated and allocation of
notified crops / areas may be made to companies strictly on the basis of
merit. Threshold yields being the same for all insurance companies, lowest
weighted premium quoted by a company for all crops within the district i.e.
Sum of all crops (premium x area sown) may be the guiding factor for area
allocation and, further care may be taken to select one company for one
district / notified area on merits as stated above.

7.5.3 In order to maintain stability and c ontinuity, it is suggested that the State
Government / UT may allow a particular insurance company to implement
the scheme for a minimum period of three years once it is allocated a
district, i.e. the district allocated for Kharif 2014 shall also continue for
Kharif 2015 and Kharif 2016and similarly for Rabi season. However, the
State government / UT and the concerned insurance company is free to
renegotiate the terms if relevant. This will facilitate the insurance company
to establish the credibility among the farmers through investment out of the
premium savings in various welfare activities for socio-economic
development of the farmers like creation of the facilities of drinking
water/health care/education, farm leveling, no claim bonus, Weather
Forecasts, farmers’ assets insurance, personal accident cover, common
Service Centers etc. It is also anticipated that long term continuity gives an
opportunity to Insurers, Bankers, State Govt. and other stakeholders for a
supportive and collaborative interaction and business relationship and
service effectiveness.

7.6 Seasonality discipline, claim settlement methodology :

7.6.1 State Government /UT shall also notify seasonality discipline at the
commencement of each season for various activities under the scheme
viz. submission of insurance proposals, consolidated declarations by
banks, yield data, methodology for claim assessment of losses for (i) area
approach, (ii) localized calamities, (iii) prevented sowing, (iv) post harvest
loss, (v) payment slabs for total loss during the season, (vi) on-account
payment for major calamities, etc as per the provisions of the scheme.

National Crop Insurance Programme (NCIP)
F. No 13015//02/2012-Credit-II Operational Guidelines
7

7.7 Notification of Authorized Data providers:

7.7.1 For on account payment of claims and claims for prevented sowing, etc.,
State Government shall notify concerned weather data provider / expert
agency whose report/methodology is to be used in assessing the extent of
losses and payment.

8. PREMIUM RATES:
8.1 Insurance companies will work out actuarial premium as well as net
premium rates (premium rates actually payable by farmers after premium
subsidy) for each notified crop through standard actuarial methodology in
conformity with provisions of IRDA for consideration of SLCCCI.
8.2 Wherever possible, actuarial premium will be worked out with provision for
discount, in case majority farmers in an insurance unit adopt better water
conservation and sustainable farming practices for better risk coverage.
8.3 Actuarial premium rates shall be c apped at 11% for Kharif season and 9%
for Rabi for food crops & oilseeds. However, in case of annual
commercial/horticultural crops, cap of 13% on actuarial rates of premium
will be applicable.
8.4 In case of the crops whose premium will be higher than the cap level, then
their sum insured will be reduced in the proportion to cap level. Example:
Assume that the original sum insured is Rs. 20,000 / ha, and the actuarial
premium rate is 15% for a cereal crop in Kharif season with a premium cap
of 11%. Insurance company is entitled to collect a premium of Rs. 3,000
as per actuarial premium rate. However, due to premium cap, it can collect
only Rs. 2,200. While the insurance co mpany shall collect only Rs. 2,200 /
ha, but the sum insured is scaled down on pro-rata basis to Rs.
14,667/ha., i.e. Rs. 20,000 multiplied by a factor of Rs. 2,200 / Rs. 3,000.
8.5 Capping of sum insured is also applicable for compulsory portion of sum
insured w.r.t. loanee farmers.
8.6 These caps may be reviewed and revised after/for every Five year Plan
Period, if felt necessary.

9. PREMIUM SUBSIDY:

9.1 Subsidy in the Premium is allowed up-front, and the Premium payable by
the cultivators is net of the applicable subsidy.
9.2 Subsidy in premium to all farmers irrespective of their holdings and crop(s)
insured is applicable as under:

National Crop Insurance Programme (NCIP)
F. No 13015//02/2012-Credit-II Operational Guidelines
8

S. No Premium slab Subsidy to Farmers
1 Upto 2% Nil
2 >2 - 5% 40% subject to minimum net premium of 2%
3 >5 – 10% 50% subject to minimum net premium of 3%
4 >10 –15% 60% subject to minimum net premium of 5%
5 >15% 75% subject to minimum net premium of 6%.

9.3 Premium subsidy is to be shar ed equally by DAC and concerned State
Government / UT. However, the State government / UT is free to extend
additional subsidy over & above the stipulated subsidy from its budget. In
other words, additional subsidy, if any shall be entirely borne by the State
government / UT.
9.4 Subsidy in premium is allowed only to the extent of normal Sum Insured or
capped Sum Insured, as the case may be.

10. SUM INSURED/LIMIT OF COVERAGE:

10.1 Sum Insured is broadly based on ‘c ost of production’/ equivalent to the
scale of finance as decided by the District Level Technical Committee, and
is pre-declared by SLCCCI and notified. Sum Insured for individual farmer
is the product of farmer’s declared ‘area under cultivation’ (in hectare) for
that notified crop and sum Insured per hectare, as mentioned in
notification. ‘Area under cultivation’ shall always be expressed in ‘hectare’.
10.2 In case of Loanee farmers under Compulsory Component, the sum
insured would be atleast equal to the amount of crop loan
sanctioned/advance, which may be extended upto the value of the
threshold yield of the insured crop at the option of insured farmers. Where
value of the threshold yield is lower than the loan amount per unit area, the
higher of the two is the sum insured.
10.3 Sum insured is worked out by multiplying the Notional Threshold Yield
(district / region / state level) of crop, with Minimum Support Price (MSP) of
current year or previous year (if MS P for current year is not available)
and in case of crops where MSP is not declared ‘average farm gate price’
maintained by Marketing Dept., shall be adopted.
10.4 ‘Area under cultivation’ for notified crop as already declared by loanee
farmer in ‘Loan Application’ while applying for loan, shall form the basis
for fixing “Maximum Borrowing Limit (MBL)” by lending bank. While Non-
Loanee farmer has to declare ‘acreage under cultivation’ for each notified
crop in Insurance proposal form.

National Crop Insurance Programme (NCIP)
F. No 13015//02/2012-Credit-II Operational Guidelines
9

11. SEASONALITY DISCIPLINE:

11.1 The cut off date is uniform for both loanee and non-loanee cultivators. The
State wise cut off dates for different crops shall be based on Crop
Calendar of major crops i.e. Appendix IV of the publication “Agricultural
Statistics at a glance 2012” published by the Directorate of Economics and
Statistics, Department of Agriculture & Cooperation, Ministry of Agriculture,
Government of India (placed as Annexure in the operational guidelines).
For those notified crops which do not find mention in the above mentioned
Annexure, the broad range of seasonality discipline as given in the chart
below, shall apply.

Activity Kharif Rabi
Loaning period (loan sanctioned) for
Loanee farmers covered on
Compulsory basis.
April to July October to
December
Cut-off date for receipt of Proposals of
farmers (loanee & non-loanee).
31th July 31st December
Cut-off date for receipt of Declarations
of Loanee farmers covered on
compulsory basis & non-loanee
farmers covered on Voluntary basis
from Bank branches to Nodal Banks
Within 15
working days for
loanee farmers
and seven
working days for
non-loanee
farmers after cut-
off date
Within 15
working days for
loanee farmers
and seven
working days for
non-loanee
farmers after cut-
off date
Cut-off date for receipt of Declarations
of farmers covered on Voluntary basis
from designated insurance Agent(s) to
Insurance Companies
Within two
working days
after receiving
declaration/
premium.
Within two
working days
after receive
declaration/
premium.
Cut-off date for receipt of Declarations
of Loanee farmers covered on
compulsory basis & non-loanee
farmers covered on Voluntary basis
from Nodal Banks to Insurance
Company
Within seven
working days
from receipt of
Declarations by
the Nodal bank
Within seven
working days
from receipt of
Declarations by
the Nodal bank
Cut-off date for receipt of yield data Within a month
from final harvest
Within a month
from final harvest

11.2 Further, in case of three crop / season pattern, a modified discipline
keeping in mind the overall seasonality discipline prescribed above, shall
be adopted by State Level Co-ordination Committee on Crop Insurance
(SLCCCI).

National Crop Insurance Programme (NCIP)
F. No 13015//02/2012-Credit-II Operational Guidelines
10

11.3 Keeping in mind the specialty and catastrophic nature of crop insurance,
SLCCCI shall fix seasonality in such a way that it doesn’t encourage
adverse selection or moral hazards. No relaxation for extension in the
above seasonality/cut off dates shall be considered / granted by this
department however, pre-ponement in cut off dates shall be considered
on case to case basis. If any state/UT extends the above seasonality / cut
off dates on their-own then central share of premium subsidy shall not be
available for the concerned notified crops / areas.

12. COLLECTION OF PROPOSALS AND PREMIUM AMOUNT:

12.1 The present Nodal Banks system under erstwhile NAIS/Pilot MNAIS will
continue for MNAIS as well, wherein the implementing insurance company
is not required to deal with all the loan disbursing points and instead, deals
only with designated Nodal Bank bran ches, mostly at District/Regional
level. Besides, insurance company may also use the IRDA approved
insurance agents/ insurance intermediaries for the purpose.

12.2. Declaration formats to be submitted by Nodal banks shall contain details
about Insurance Unit, sum insured per unit, premium per unit, total area
insured of the farmers, no. and type of farmers covered (small & marginal
or other) and no. of farmers under various categories (SC/ST/women)
alongwith their bank account details .

12.3 Loanee farmers (Compulsory coverage):

12.3.1 For loanee farmers, modalities will be same as in erstwhile NAIS.
Whenever banks sanction loan for notified crop in notified area, this area
is eligible for compulsory coverage, as per seasonality discipline.
Disbursing bank branch / Primary Agriculture Cooperative Society (PACS)
will prepare monthly statement of crop-wise and insurance unit-wise
details of crop insurance with premiu m as per the seasonality discipline.
Loan disbursing bank branch/PACS will finance the additional loan
towards premium amount payable by farmer for insurance.
12.3.2 For crop loans sanctioned / advanced, through Kisan Credit Cards
(KCC), which are covered under compulsory coverage, banks shall
maintain all back up records and registers, relating to compliance with
MNAIS and its seasonality discipline, cut-off-date for submitting
Declarations as in case of normal crop loans. Bank branch will apportion
coverage among insurable crops, based on acreage mentioned in loan
application or on the basis of actual area sown as declared by the farmer
subsequently.
12.3.3 It has been observed that KCC holders, at times withdraw maximum
amount, out of total crop loan sanctioned (combined yearly sanctioned

National Crop Insurance Programme (NCIP)
F. No 13015//02/2012-Credit-II Operational Guidelines
11

limit for all Kharif & Rabi crops), at the beginning of year itself because
there is no particular time limit for withdrawals of loans under KCC. Further
no season-wise/ crop-wise details of withdrawals by farmers are
maintained by banks, which results in minimal or nil withdrawals during
Rabi and therefore, less insurance coverage during Rabi season. In view
of the absence of timeline for withdrawals, farmers who avail crop-loans
through KCC together for Kharif and Rabi even after cut-off date, - such
loans may be covered under compulsory insurance for respective
seasons.
12.3.4 Crop loans advanced against hypothecation of gold / ornaments are also
eligible for compulsory coverage, subject to insurability of crop and
seasonality discipline.
12.3.5 In case of loanee farmers, under compulsory component, sum insured
shall be at least equal to am ount of crop loan sanctioned/advanced,
subject to sum insured cap. However, farmers may opt for higher insured
sum which may extend upto value of threshold yield.
12.3.6 Wherever value of Notional Threshold Yield is lower than loan amount per
unit area, higher of two will be the sum insured. Farmers can also opt for
higher insured sum, equivalent to 150% of value of average yield (based
on which Notional Threshold Yield is worked out), in which case farmer will
not be entitled for premium subsidy for portion of sum insured, which
exceeds either loan sanctioned / advanced or value of threshold yield.
12.3.7 Declaration formats to be submitted by Nodal banks will be different for
Loanee farmers availing sum insured upto limit of amount of loan
sanctioned/advanced and those loanee farmers availing higher limit of
sum insured (value of threshold yield or 150% of value of average
yield).Wherever value of Notional Threshold Yield is lower than loan
amount per unit areas, higher of two will be the sum insured.
12.3.8 Nodal Branch, in turn, shall consolidate these statements from bank
branches / PACS under its jurisdiction, and forward the same to insurance
company along with a banker cheque / demand draft towards insurance
premium, in accordance with cut off dates, as specified by SLCCCI for that
particular crop and season.
12.4 Non-loanee farmers (Optional co verage) through intermediaries:

12.4.1 Farmers desirous of availing in surance shall fill up Proposal Form of
Scheme and submit same to nearest bank branch or authorized channel
partners or insurance intermediaries of insurance company.

12.4.2 In case channel partner is a Bank, farmers will submit duly filled up
proposal form in the village branch of a Commercial Bank (CB) or
Regional Rural Bank (RRB), or PACS (DCCB) with requisite insurance
premium amount. Operating a bank account is essential for such cases.
Branch/PACS officials will assist the farmers in completing insurance

National Crop Insurance Programme (NCIP)
F. No 13015//02/2012-Credit-II Operational Guidelines
12

proposal form and provide necessary guidance. While accepting the
proposal and premium, Branch / PACS will be responsible for verification
of sum insured and its limit, applicable premium rate, etc. Bank Branch /
PACS will thereafter consolidate t hese particulars and send them to
respective Nodal Bank and Nodal Ban ks will, in turn, submit crop-wise
and insurance unit-wise Crop Insurance Declarations in the prescribed
format, along with the premium, within the stipulated time, to insurance
company.

12.4.3 Non-loanee cultivators could also be serviced directly by any designated
agents, other authorized channel partner or insurance intermediaries,
channel partner/intermediary (approved by the IRDA) of the insurance
company for the purpose and will act as guide and facilitator, advise of
benefits and desirability of Scheme, guide farmers through procedures;
collect requisite premium and remit individual / consolidated premium to
insurance company, accompanied by individual proposal forms and
summary details in Declarations / Listing sheet (MIS).

12.4.4 While accepting the Proposal and the premium from aforesaid,designated
agents, other authorized channel partner or insurance intermediaries,
channel partner/intermediary (approved by the IRDA) of the insurance
company it shall be the responsibility of Insurance Company or its
designated agents to verify the land records, particulars of acreage,
sum insured etc. and applicable contract/agreement details in case
of share croppers/tenant farmers.The designated agents shall remit the
premium with consolidated proposals within 72 hours. However, it’s
mandatory that the Non-loanee cultivators serviced by the designated
agents should hold a bank account in order to facilitate remittance of the
claim, if payable.

12.4.5 For farmers covered under the scheme on voluntary basis, sum insured
is upto value of threshold yield (as calculated in case of loanee farmers),
but if such farmers desire higher coverage, then coverage upto 100%
value of threshold yield with normal premium subsidy; and coverage
beyond 100% value of threshold yield and upto 150% value of average
yield will be without premium subsidy.

12.5 Non-loanee farmers (Optional co verage) – Directly to Insurance
companies:

12.5.1Non-Loanee farmer may submit insurance proposals personally / through
post to insurance company with requisite premium. Non-loanee farmer
can also avail insurance through ‘on-line portal’ of insurance company.
However, it's mandatory that Non-Loanee farmers, personally submitting
proposals to insurance company, should have insurable interest and

National Crop Insurance Programme (NCIP)
F. No 13015//02/2012-Credit-II Operational Guidelines
13

submit necessary documentary evidence as proof, as decided by
SLCCCI. The insured farmer forfeits the premium and the right to claim
(if any) if the material facts furnished in the proposal form are wrong or
incorrect.

12.5.2 Insurance companies retain the right to accept or reject insurance
proposal(s) in case proposal is incomplete, not accompanied by
necessary documentary proof or insurance premium. It is also mandatory
to hold Bank account in Service Area branch / designated bank branch, to
receive crop insurance claims, if any.

12.5.3 Option for change of crop name: Farmers covered, on voluntary basis,
can buy insurance before actual sowing / planting, based on advance
crop planning. However, for any reason if a farmer changes the crop
planned earlier, he should intimate the change to insurance company, at
least before 30 days from cut-off-date for buying insurance or sowing,
through financial institution / channel partner / insurance intermediary /
direct; as the case may be, along with difference in premium payable, if
any, accompanied by sowing certificate issued by concerned village /
sub-district level official of the State. In case the premium paid was
higher, insurance company will refund excess premium.
12.5.4 Declarations received from the Banks/PACS after the cut off date shall be
summarily rejected and the liability, if any, for such declarations shall rest
with the concerned bank. Therefore, the Banks/PACS must not receive
any proposal after the cut-off date. The Banks/PACS must also ensure
that the consolidated statement alongwith the premium amount is
remitted to the insurance company within the stipulated time, failing which
they shall be responsible for payment of claims, if any to the farmers.
However, any dispute in the matter may be refereed to Department by the
concerned State/Agency.
12.5.5 The Nodal Banks may also collect the list of individual insured farmers
(both loanee & non-loanee) with requisite details like name, fathers’
name, Bank Account number, village, categories – S&M/SC/ST/Women,
insured acreage, insured crop(s), sum insured, premium collected, Govt.
subsidy etc. from concerned branch in soft copy also for further
reconciliation and send the same to the concerned insurance company
within 15 days after final cut-off date for submission of Proposal /
Declaration to insurance company.
12.5.6 Insurance companies may also collect the requisite information in respect
of non-loanee farmers from the authorized agent in same formats. It is
responsibility of the concerned insurance companies to collect/obtain the
details of the insured farmers (both loanee & non-loanee) from the
bank/financial institutions/ intermediaries/agents.
12.5.7 Insurance Companies should also verify and be satisfied themselves
about the coverage of farmers/crops and up-load the same in their

National Crop Insurance Programme (NCIP)
F. No 13015//02/2012-Credit-II Operational Guidelines
14

websites within a month preferably before the approaching the
Government to release the final installment of subsidy under the scheme.
13. LOSS ASSESSMENT AND PAYMENT OF CLAIMS/ INDEMNITY:

13.1 WIDE SPREAD CALAMITIES (Based on season end yield) :

13.1.1 The Scheme operates on the basis of ‘Area Approach’ i.e., Defined Areas
for each notified crop for widespread calamities and insurance unit is
Village/Village Panchayat or any other equivalent unit for major crops and
for other crops it may be a unit of size in between Village Panchayat to
Taluka, to be decided by the State Government /UT. External agencies /
Agencies to which CCE work is outs ourced, if any, shall be entrusted only
to the professional agencies with adequate experience in agriculture / yield
estimation. It is mandatory for these agencies to collect photographic
evidence of the CCEs.

13.1.2 State Government/UT authorised by SLCCCI will plan and conduct
requisite number of CCEs for all notified crops in notified insurance units,
in order to assess crop yields.

13.1.3 CCEs shall be undertaken per unit area /per crop, on a sliding scale, as
indicated below:
S. No Insurance Unit Minimum sample size
of CCEs
1. District 24
2. Taluka / Tehsil / Block 16
3. Mandal / Phirka / Revenue Circle /
Hobli or any other equivalent unit
10
4. Village / Village Panchayat 4 for major crops & 8
for others

13.1.4 However, a Technical Advisory Committee (TAC) comprising
representatives from Indian Agricultural Statistical Research Institute
(IASRI), National Sample Survey Organisation (NSSO), Central Statistical
Organization (CSO), DAC and insurance company shall review sample
size of CCEs from time to time. TAC shall also review any other technical
matters related to conduct of CCEs and timely submission of yield data.

13.1.5 States implementing MNAIS at Village/Village panchayat level are entitled
for 50% reimbursement of expenses of incremental CCEs from Govt. of
India subject to availability of funds under the overall budget earmarked for
the purpose.

National Crop Insurance Programme (NCIP)
F. No 13015//02/2012-Credit-II Operational Guidelines
15

13.1.6 In instances where required number of CCEs could not be conducted due
to non-availability of adequate cropped area, yield data for such units can
be generated by Insurance company in consultation with State
Government using methods, such as clubbing with neighbouring /
contagious units, adopting yield of next higher unit, yield data generated
by proxy indicators, correction / correlation factor with next higher unit, etc.

13.1.7 Alternative yield assessment techniques, such as satellite imagery, agro-
meteorological and econo-metric and a combination of such techniques,
etc. can be explored and adopted after establishing reasonable level of
standardization. Pilots may be taken up to explore the possibilities to use
modern technology like Remote S ensing Technology (RST)/Satellite
imageries in consultation with Ministry of Earth Sciences / Ministry of
Science &Technology to supplement t he yield assessment through CCEs.
A Committee may also be constituted to coordinate & monitor the progress
made by the different public & private organizations engaged in such
studies.
13.1.8 State Government / UT will permit insurance companies) to co-observe /
witness CCEs as considered relevant by insurance companies. Moreover
State Government Department overseeing conduct of CCEs will submit
yield data as per cut-off date decided by SLCCCI, along with results of
individual CCEs. Yield data will be furnished to Insurance company by
State Government / UT, in accordance with the cut-off dates fixed, and
crops and areas notified, based on total number of CCEs (not less than
minimum sample size prescribed) being conducted. Wherever the yields
reported at insurance unit level are abnormally low or high vis-à-vis the
general crop condition, use of satellite imagery be made to confirm the
yields. Incase of significant diff erences between these two yields, DAC
may take a final decision in the matter in consultation with concerned State
Govt. & insurance company.

13.1.9 State Government/ UT will maintain single series of CCEs and resultant
yield estimates, both for Crop Production estimates and Crop Insurance.
Planning and supervision for all CCEs by State Government will be of
same order as that of General Crop Estimation Surveys (GCES).

13.1.10State shall strengthen audit pr ocess of CCE conduct, with necessary
checks and balances. Audio/Video-recording of CCEs can be
implemented, besides other processes.

13.1.11Claim Formula:

If ‘Actual Yield’ (AY) per hectare of insured crop for insurance unit
(calculated on basis of requisite number of CCEs) in insured season, falls
short of specified ‘Threshold Yield’ (TY), all insured farmers growing that
crop in defined area are deemed to have suffered shortfall in yield of

National Crop Insurance Programme (NCIP)
F. No 13015//02/2012-Credit-II Operational Guidelines
16

similar magnitude. MNAIS seeks to provide coverage against such
contingency.

‘Claim’ shall be calculated as per the following formula:

(Threshold Yield - Actual Yield) X Sum Insured
Threshold Yield

Where,
Threshold yield for a crop in a notified insurance unit is the average yield
of past seven years (excluding calamity year(s) as notified by State
Government/UT) multiplied by applicable indemnity level for that crop.
And
Two levels of Indemnity, viz., 90% & 80% corresponding to risks level of the
areas shall be available for all crops will be notified by State Govt./UT for a
particular crop at a particular level (sub-district / district / region). Insurance
company shall decide applicable indemnity level based on risk categorization,
and the methodology shall be made available to DAC.
13.1.12 Illustration:
In table below, assumed yield of wheat for the last 7 years is given for
insurance unit area of “X”.
Year 2005-06 2006-07 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12
Yield
(kg/ha)
4500 3750 2000 4250 1800 4300 1750

The years of 2007-08, 2009-10 and 2011-12 were declared natural
calamity years.

Total of yields of seven years is 22350 kg/ha and that of twoworst
calamity years is 3550 kg/ha i.e. (1800+1750). Therefore according to
provision, average of past seven years excluding maximum two calamity
years is (22350–3550=18800/5) i.e. 3760 kg/ha. Hence, threshold yield at
90% and 80% of indemnity levels will be 3384 kg/ha and 3008 kg/ha,
respectively.

13.2 On-Account Payment of Claims due to Mid-Season Adversity:
13.2.1 In case of adverse seasonal conditions during crop season viz. floods,
prolonged dry spells, severe drought etc, insurance companies in
consultation with concerned State Government/UT based on agro
meteorological data/ satellite imagery or any other proxy indicator will
decide about crops/ areas for which on account payment will be made, not
exceeding 25% of likely claims. Appraisal of mid-season adversity and
quantum of on-account payment will be established jointly by Government
of India/concerned State Government/UT and insurance companies. On

National Crop Insurance Programme (NCIP)
F. No 13015//02/2012-Credit-II Operational Guidelines
17

account payment will be implemented only in states where such proxy
indicators can be established and will be considered for payment, only if
the expected yield during the season is less than 50% of normal yield.
13.2.2 In such an instance, insurance company based on declarations received
from banks or insurance proposals, received from other authorized
agencies or directly from farmers for such crops and areas affected by
adverse season, shall work out like ly claims which will occur based on
end of season yield assessment, and will release claim upto 25% of likely
claims, in advance to farmers (subject to receipt of premium subsidy)
through nodal banks subject to adjustment against claims assessed on
yield basis i.e. in case end of season yield based claim works out to be
higher, then difference of claim would be payable and in case end of the
season claim based on yield happens to be lower, then the insurance
company reserves the right to recover excess claims so paid to farmers.
13.2.3 Illustration:
District ‘A’ has been affected by floods having 100 insurance units under
Crop ‘X”. Out of which 50 insurance units were severely affected and as per
the weather indicators / agro-met data, it has been assessed that 30
insurance units could have yield loss of more than 50% (compared to the
threshold yield). Out of these 30 insurance units, estimated yield loss for 5
units is 80% (Category-I), for another 10 units, it is 70% (Category-II) and
remaining 15 units, it is 60% (Category-III) of threshold yield, due to which
likely yield may be 20%, 30% and 40% , respectively. As per declarations
received, if sum insured for notified areas in Category-I, Category-II and
Category-III is Rs. 1 crore, Rs. 2 crore, and Rs 3 crore, respectively, then
likely final claims will be Rs. 80 lakh, 140 lakh and 180 lakh, respectively.
Hence on-account claims upto 25% shall be Rs. 20 lakh, 35 lakh and 45
lakh, which will be released during the season, subject to receipt of
premium subsidy.
13.3 Prevented Sowing / Planting Claims:
13.3.1 Due to non receipt of sufficient rainfall or excess rainfall or other weather
adversities, farmers in one insurance unit may not be in a position to
either sow or transplant crop or grow crop (failed at an early stage). When
this incidence is widespread i.e. majo rity of area in one insurance unit
remains unsown / failed sowing, (say, more than 75% of normal area) or
as decided for various crops by SLCCCI at time of notification, then
insurance company based on weather / rainfall position in insurance unit,
as issued by concerned office of IMD during the season, and acreage-
sown particulars received from State Government, shall decide extent of
claims to be paid. In case of non availability of IMD stations at a location
or non availability of IMD data on certain days, other authentic weather
stations / rain gauge stations of State Government/ Autonomous bodies/
Agriculture universities / Private agencies as approved by SLCCCI can

National Crop Insurance Programme (NCIP)
F. No 13015//02/2012-Credit-II Operational Guidelines
18

also be considered for purpose of measuring weather parameters
including rainfall.
13.3.2 DAC/ State Government shall arrange weather / rainfall data from IMD /
Other autonomous / government bodies, tothe insurance company, while
data from private data providers shall be arranged by the concerned
insurance company. Area sown particulars shall also be provided by State
Government/UT, within two months after end of normal sowing period.
13.3.3 Rainfall requirement for sowing a crop differs from crop to crop. Similarly,
the quantum of inputs used before sowing (land preparation, seed
fertilizer etc) varies from crop to crop. Insurance company in consultation
with SLCCCI shall assess extent of claims payable based on the weather
/ rainfall position, crop, acreage planted etc. and in any case maximum
claims payable will be restricted to 25% of sum-insured. Having become
eligible for prevented / failed sowing claim, insurance cover gets
automatically terminated. Process of determining prevented / failed
sowing being automated, farmers need not lodge any claim for prevented
/ failed sowing.
13.3.4 Illustration:
District ‘B’ with 100 insurance units has been affected by dry-spell at the
beginning of crop season, consequently about 80% of the area could not
be sown in about 50 insurance units for groundnut crop, where per
hectare sum insured is Rs. 20,000. As per SLCCCI slab of payment for
prevented sowing, is say, 75%; and the benefit payable is: sum insured X
75% X 25%, which on a sum insured of Rs. 20,000 works out to Rs.
3,750. In case of failed sowing, if SLCCCI slab is 100%;the benefit
payable is: sum insured X 100% X 25%, which on sum insured of Rs.
20,000 works out to Rs. 5,000.
13.4 Post-Harvest Losses:
13.4.1 In case of occurrence of specified peril of cyclone in coastal areas (as
notified by State Government) resulting in damage to harvested crop lying
in field in ‘cut & spread’ condition, insured farmer has to lodge a written
claim intimation in standard format to the insurance company through
Nodal Bank/Intermediary or directly within 48 hours of occurrence of
event. This coverage is available only upto maximum period of two weeks
(14 days) from harvesting. Harvested crop bundled and heaped at a
place before threshing is beyond coverage under post harvest losses.
13.4.2 Assessment of damage will be on individual plot basis. Insurance
company will nominate an authorised loss assessor who will visit the field
and assess damage and submit report to insurance company. Services of
local officials of Bank and Agriculture / Revenue authorities, may be
utilized for this purpose by insurance company.

13.4.3 Based on report submitted by loss assessor, insurance company will
arrive at claim payable and loss as a percentage of sum insured. The

National Crop Insurance Programme (NCIP)
F. No 13015//02/2012-Credit-II Operational Guidelines
19

claim payable will be higher of area approach based claim and claim
assessed for post harvest losses.

13.4.5 Illustration:

As against a sum insured of Rs. 50,000, post harvest losses are
assessed at 50%, i.e. Rs. 25,000, and subsequent claims estimated
based on ‘area approach’, are Rs. 30,000. In such case the farmer will be
paid Rs. 30,000 as claim. In case post harvest loss claim is paid
immediately, the balance claim estimated based on ‘area approach’ of Rs.
5,000 (being the difference between the two estimates) will be paid at
time of payment of ‘area approach’ claims. In any case total claim will not
exceed sum insured.

13.5 LOCALIZED RISKS:
13.5.1 Insured farmers who experience crop losses due to occurrence of
localized perils / calamities, as notified by SLCCCI in the insurance unit(s)
for the purpose, will give immediate notice (in standard format) to
insurance company through concerned financial institution /channel
partner or directly, within 48 hours along with particulars of crop insured
and extent and cause of damage. On receipt of loss intimation, insurance
company shall depute Loss assessor s (authorised loss assessors or
technical personnel of the company) to area for assessment of crop loss.
District Revenue administration and Agriculture Department shall assist
insurance company in assessing extent of crop loss. Localized calamities
for this purpose are hailstorm and landslide.
13.5.2 Cost of inputs incurred until time of occurrence of peril, and expected loss
in final yield due to peril, will form basis for loss assessment. In case
claims settled under localized claims are less than ‘area approach’ claims,
only balance claims shall be paid to insured farmers. However, if claims
settled under localized calamities are higher than widespread calamity
based claims, farmer is not required to refund balance claim.
13.5.3 Illustration:
As against a sum insured of Rs. 30,000, loss due to operation of hailstorm
is assessed at 40%, i.e. Rs. 12,000, and subsequent claim estimated
based on ‘area approach’, is Rs. 18,000. In such case the farmer will
receive a total claim of Rs. 18,000. Since the loss due to operation of
localized calamities, Rs.12000/- is paid immediately, and the balance
claim of Rs. 6,000 (being the differ ence between two estimates) will be
paid at the time of payment of ‘area approach’ claims. In any case the
total claim shall not exceed sum insured.

National Crop Insurance Programme (NCIP)
F. No 13015//02/2012-Credit-II Operational Guidelines
20

13.6 PROCEDURE FOR SETTLEMENT OF CLAIMS:

16.6.1 Upfront premium subsidy from Government of India and concerned State
Government/UT, should have been received in full for the season, by
insurance company to enable them to settle the claim.

16.6.2 In case of widespread calamity (end of season claims ), once yield data is
received from State Government as per the cut-off-dates decided, claims
will be worked out as per Declarations received from banks / channel
partners / insurance intermediaries for each notified area and claims will be
approved by Competent Authority of Insurance company.

16.6.3 In case of farmers covered on compulsory basis, claims shall be released
only through electronic transfer, follo wed by hard copy containing claim
particulars, to individual nodal banks; and banks at grass root level, will
credit accounts of individual farmers within a week of receipt of funds from
the Insurance companies and shall provide a certificate to the insurance
companies alongwith list of farmers benefited. Bank Branch should also
display particulars of beneficiaries on notice board.

16.6.4 In case of farmers covered on voluntary basis, account payee claim
cheques in name of the insured farmers will be dispatched, only where
electronic transfer is not possible. Claim cheques shall be routed through
concerned channel partner for onward transmission on submission of
advance discharge voucher by farmer. However, electronic transfer of
money is desirable to ensure timely & hassle free payment of claims.

16.6.5 In case of claims under prevented/failed sowing, localized calamities,
post-harvest losses; insurance company will get claims approved by their
competent authority after assessment and shall release the claims as per
procedure given in ( 16.6.3) and (16.6.4) above.

16.6.6 Insurance company shall take all necessary steps to take appropriate
reinsurance cover for their portfolio in order to safeguard insured’s interest.
In case premium to claims ratio exceeds 1:5,DAC will provide protection to
insurance company. For this purpose, Catastrophic Fund at national level
will be set up which would be contributed by Centre and State
Governments on 50:50 basis and overall losses exceeding 500% of gross
premium will be met out of this fund.

16.6.7 Disputed claims / sub-standard claims, if any will be referred through
SLCCCI/State Government to DAC for consideration by insurance
company; and decision of DAC in case of any interpretation of provisions of

National Crop Insurance Programme (NCIP)
F. No 13015//02/2012-Credit-II Operational Guidelines
21

scheme or disputes will be binding on State Govt. / Insurance Company /
Banks and the farmers.

17. IMPORTANT CONDITIONS/CLAUSES APPLICABLE FOR COVERAGE
OF RISK:
17.1 Insurance companies should have received the premium for coverage
either from bank, channel partner, insurance intermediary or directly. Any
loss in transit due to negligence by these agencies or non remittance of
premium by these agencies, insurance company is not liable for payment of
claims.
17.2 In case of any substantial misreporting by nodal bank /branch in case of
compulsory farmers coverage, concerned bank only shall be liable for such
mis-reporting.
17.3 Insurance company will have discretion to accept or reject any risk of an
insurance unit(s) for any crop(s) considering prevailing agricultural situation.
Mere sanctioning / disbursement of crop loans and submission of
proposals/ declarations and remittanc e of premium by farmer / bank,
without explicit intent to raise the crop, does not constitute acceptance of
risk by insurance company.
17.4 In the event of near total crop failure during early or mid season affecting
entire insurance unit, insurance company shall adopt a graded scale
indemnity settlement restricting indemnity to proportion of input cost upto
that stage. Graded scale shall be worked out by insurance company in
consultation with State Government. Wherever necessary, services of
expert agencies may be availed, by insurance companies for arriving at
graded scale of payment.
17.5 Insurance company, if deemed necessary, will investigate coverage on its
own or by an agency appointed for the purpose and may utilize
technologies, including satellite imagery for identification of anomalies in
crop insurance coverage vis-à-vis actual field conditions. Upon identification
of adverse phenomenon based on such investigation, insurance company
has the right to scale down sum insured. In such cases no refund of
premium paid by farmers shall be made by insurance company.
17.6 Where the acreage insured is more than the acreage sown under a
particular crop at the insurance unit level, the insurance company can scale
down the sum insured on pro-rata basis, and settle the claims on the scaled
down sum insured. If needed, DAC may formulate separate guidelines for
the purpose once the Committee set-up in this regard submits the report
and the DAC accepts it.
18. PUBLICITY & AWARENESS:

18.1. Adequate publicity needs to be given in all the villages of the notified
districts/ areas. All possible means of electronic and print media, farmer’s

National Crop Insurance Programme (NCIP)
F. No 13015//02/2012-Credit-II Operational Guidelines
22

fair, exhibitions including SMS mess ages, short films, and documentaries
shall be utilized to create and disseminate awareness, benefits and
limitations of the Scheme among the cultivators and the agencies involved
in implementing the Scheme. Agriculture/Cooperation Departments of the
State in consultation with Insurance Companies shall work out appropriate
Plan for adequate awareness and publicity three months prior to the start of
coverage period.

18.2.The State Government/ UT in collaboration with Insurance Companies shall
also chalk out plan for capacity building of the associated agents, banks etc
for effective implementation of the scheme and organize training
workshops/sensitization programme for them in association with
participating insurance companies.

19.REVIEW OF THE SCHEME:

19.1. The Scheme would be reviewed periodically and necessary improvements
would be considered.

19.2. State Governments / UT may ensure that products provide comprehensive
insurance coverage to the farmers on sound insurance principles and
provide the best value for the premium. State Government may also
review the progress of scheme periodically and undertake impact
assessment after the completion of each season and send their
suggestion/recommendations to this Department for making further
improvements in the scheme.

20. COMMISSION & BANK CHARGES

20.1. Bank shall be paid service charges @ 4% of the premium collected from
farmers. Rural agents engaged in providing insurance related services to
farmers may be paid appropriate commission as decided by the insurance
company, subject to cap prescribed under IRDA regulations.

21. CAPACITY BUILDING & TRAINING:

21.1 It is proposed to set up an independent and well-equipped Technical
Support Unit (TSU) under the overall leadership and guidance of the
Ministry of Agriculture, Government of India to monitor implementation of
MNAIS, product structuring, standardization & Benchmarking of products,
rationalization of premium rate/subsidy, issuing guidelines for installation &
accreditation of Weather Stations, creation of national grid for statistical
data for the purpose and issuance of directives to insurance companies.

21.2 It is also proposed to provide spec ialized trainings / organize workshops for
the capacity building of the State Government officials and farmers’ groups.

National Crop Insurance Programme (NCIP)
F. No 13015//02/2012-Credit-II Operational Guidelines
23

State Government may send the name and details of officials who require
such specialized training by the end of May and December, every year.

22. MONITORING OF THE SCHEME AND SOCIAL AUDIT

22.1 State Level Coordination Committee on Crop Insurance (SLCCCI) of the
concerned State will be responsible for monitoring of the schemes /
programme in their states. However, a National Level Monitoring
Committee (NLMC) under the chairmanship of Joint Secretary (Credit),
DAC will monitor the scheme at national level.

22.2 It is proposed to take following monitoring measures for effective
implementation during each crop season to ensure maximum benefits to
the farmers:

i) The Nodal Bank(s)/intermediaries may collect the list of individual
insured farmers (both loanee & non-loanee) with requisite details like
name, fathers’ name, Bank Account number, village, categories –
S&M/SC/ST/Women, insured acreage, insured crop(s), sum insured,
premium collected, Govt. subsidy etc from concerned branch in soft
copy for further reconciliation and send the same to the concerned
insurance company along with declarations of farmers within 15 days
after final cut-off date. Yield data based on CCEs shall be made
available to the concerned insurance company by the state
government within a month from the date of final harvest.

ii) After receiving the claims amount from the concerned Insurance
Companies, the financial instituti ons/banks should remit/transfer the
claim amount to the account of beneficiaries farmers within a week
and also display the list of the beneficiaries (both loanee & non-
loanee) on the notice board of the branch within seven days with
details of beneficiaries like Name of farmers/beneficiaries, crops
insured, sum insured, amount of claims received etc. and send a copy
to concerned insurance companies with utilization certificates within 15
days for further verification and audit.

iii) The list of the beneficiaries (Bank -wise & insured area-wise) may also
be uploaded/placed on the website of the concerned insurance
companies with proper provisions & mechanisms of public grievance
redressal / feed-back etc.

iv) The Insurance Companies should also send a copy of the list of
beneficiaries received from financial banks alongwith the list of
beneficiaries covered through other intermediaries to concerned Gram
Panchayat within one month of disbursement of claims for displaying
the same in the notice board for social audit etc.

National Crop Insurance Programme (NCIP)
F. No 13015//02/2012-Credit-II Operational Guidelines
24

v) About 5% of the beneficiaries may be verified by the Regional
Offices/local level Offices of Insurance Companies and send the feed
back to concerned District Level Monitoring Committee (DLMC) &
State Government/State Level Coordination Committee on Crop
Insurance (SLCCCI).

vi) At least 10% of the beneficiaries verified by the insurance company
may be cross verified by the concerned District Level Monitoring
Committee (DLMC) and send the feed back to State Government.

vii) 1 to 2% of the beneficiaries may be verified by the Head Offices of the
insurance company/Independent Agencies appointed by the Central
Government/National Level Monitoring Committee and send the
necessary feed back to Central Government.

23. SERVICE TAX:

23.1 MNAIS is a replacement scheme of NAIS, and hence exempted from
Service Tax.

24.ROLES OF VARIOUS AGENCIES:

24.1 For successful implementation and administration of Scheme, roles of
various Agencies/Institutions/Gover nment Departments/Committees are
spelt out herein.

24.2 Role & Responsibilities of Central Government

(i) Coordination with the State Government for obtaining their “ CONSENT”
for implementation of MNAIS and issue necessary instructions from time
to time for smooth and effective implementation.

(ii) Issue necessary guidelines from time to time for implementation of
Scheme.

(iii) Issue directives to Banks through “Reserve Bank of India (RBI)” and
“National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development (NABARD)”, for
complying with the terms and conditions of MNAIS and its operational
modalities.

(iv) Facilitate providing of weather data through India Meteorological
Department (IMD) on near real-time basis to insurance company.

National Crop Insurance Programme (NCIP)
F. No 13015//02/2012-Credit-II Operational Guidelines
25

(v) Issue necessary guidelines to states to ensure that allocation of areas to
insurance companies is done by Stat es in a transparent manner based
on the insurance products submitted by them, their network and the
services provided by them in the past.

(vi) Release 50% premium subsidy towards DAC committed liability under
the scheme to insurance companies at the beginning of crop season on
the basis of business projections (pre mium collection)to be submitted by
insurance companies. The balance of premium subsidy, if any for the
season shall be released based on submission of final / actual business
achieved during crop season by insurance companies to enable them to
release claims to beneficiary farmers.

(vii) Constitute a National Level Monitoring Committee to review & monitor
the implementation of MNAIS including methodology for calculation of
premium, Benchmarking of product and other matter/directives to
insurance companies.

(viii) Reviewing the activities of participating insurance companies as and
when required, and also suggest smodifications/improvements wherever
required.

(ix) Support & suggest for creating extensive awareness and publicity of the
scheme amongst farming community.

(x) Organize Capacity building training/workshops for the State Government
officials and other stakeholders.

(xi) Interpretation of any provisions of scheme and decision on any dispute in
settlement of claims.

(xii) Setting up of TSU
24.3 Role & Responsibilities of State Government/UT Administration:

(i) Give its “CONSENT” for implementation of MNAIS component of NCIP in
writing to DAC and convey acceptan ce of provisions of MNAIS and
operational modalities.

(ii) Authorize SLCCCI to oversee implementation of Scheme on its behalf.
The composition of SLCCCI may be strengthened suitably from time to
time to give representation to all the concerned participants including
farmers in the implementation of the scheme.

(iii) Issue necessary directives to all agencies / institutions / government
departments/ committees involved in implementation of Scheme.

National Crop Insurance Programme (NCIP)
F. No 13015//02/2012-Credit-II Operational Guidelines
26

(iv) Furnish in advance insurance unit-wise (or of higher unit, if unit level data
not available) yield data of immediate past 10 years of all notified crops
under MNAIS to insurance companies.

(v) Notify Village Panchayat or other equivalent units for major crops. It may
be a unit of size in between Village Panchayat to taluka / block, for other
crops to be decided by State/UT.If States/UTs are unable to implement
MNAIS at village/village panchayat level initially such States/UTs may
obtain prior approval of DAC to implement it at higher unit area level (upto
a cluster of maximum 15 villages) for first 3-5 years.

(vi) The State government through SLCCCI will finalize crop wise areas and
applicable premium rates etc well in advance of each crop season,
following a transparent bidding process.Issue Notification at least one
month in advance of season and circulate it to all concerned before every
crop season. Notification of the State Government may essentially contain
following information:

(a) Crops and insurance units notified in various districts.
(b) Premium rates, and subsidy, as applicable for various crops.
(c) Seasonality discipline for various activities.
(d) Calamity year, if any to be excluded for calculation of threshold
yield, etc.(up to maximum two years out of last seven years)

(vii) Issuance of necessary instructions to Regional Meteorological Centres of
IMD and other government / quasi government agencies for supplying
weather data on real-time basis to insurance company.

(viii) Facilitate providing of necessary agronomic inputs from Directorate of
Agriculture and State Agricultural University to insurance companies, as
necessary for working out scales of payment under various exigencies
covered under MNAIS.

(ix) To release its share of Premium Subsidy to insurance companies, in the
beginning of every crop season, based on fair estimates submitted by
them, and settle balance of actual premium subsidy for season as soon
as final figures are submitted by insurance company. In order to ensure
timely release of premium subsidy by the states, release of GOI subsidy
shall be made to those states only which have cleared their liability of
premium subsidy excluding the immediate previous crop season.

(x) To undertake extensive awarenes s and publicity campaigns of Scheme
amongst farming community through agriculture and extension
Departments to maximize coverage of non-loanee farmers.

National Crop Insurance Programme (NCIP)
F. No 13015//02/2012-Credit-II Operational Guidelines
27

(xi) Submission of yield data for all notified crops and insurance units to
insurance companies in standard format within stipulated date.

(xii) To furnish to the insurance companies the insurance unit wise area sown
of insured crops within two months from the sowing period.

(xiii) Assist insurance companies for asse ssment of crop loss of individual
insured farmers caused by localized perils and also assist in post harvest
losses.

(xiv) To undertake requisite no. of CCE in the notified area following single
series, and provide the yield data to the insurance company within the
prescribed cut-off date, along with results of individual CCEs.

(xv) Allow insurance companies to co-observe and witness CCEs, and permit
them to access various records at grass root / district / state level. State
shall strengthen audit process of conducting CCE with necessary checks
and balances. Audio/Video-recording of CCEs shall be implemented
besides other process to ensure accuracy of CCE.

(xvi) To set up the review and monitoring committee at both, State and District
level under the chairmanship of Principal Secretary
(Agriculture/Cooperation) and District Collector, respectively for periodical
review (preferably monthly) of implementation of scheme and also verify
the coverage etc. on random basis to ensure proper coverage under the
scheme .DLMC also provide fortnightly crop condition reports and
periodical reports on seasonal weather conditions, loans disbursed extent
of area cultivated, etc. to concerned insurance company. DLMC shall
also monitor conduct of CCEs in districts.

(xvii) To create adequate awareness and publicity of the scheme.

24.4 Role & Responsibilities of Financial Institutions/Banks:

24.4.1 For purpose of MNAIS, scheduled banking institutions engaged in
disbursing Seasonal Agricultural Operations (SAO) loans as per relevant
guidelines of NABARD / RBI shall be reckoned as Banks.
24.4.2 The existing system of Nodal Banks under erstwhile NAIS would continue
to service the MNAIS. The Banks in States which have not implemented
NAIS, would create the Nodal Bank system. Each Scheduled Commercial
Bank/Cooperative Banks/Regional Rural Bank shall fix Nodal Points which
would deal with insurance companies on behalf of its branches in the
District/Region/State. However,

National Crop Insurance Programme (NCIP)
F. No 13015//02/2012-Credit-II Operational Guidelines
28

a. Commercial Banks will c onsider designating Nodal Bank-
Branches at District level. Preferably, controlling branch in that
area may be designated as Nodal Bank.
b. Cooperative Banks may designate District Central Cooperative
Banks (DCCB) as Nodal Bank.
c. Regional Rural Banks (RRB) may designate their Head Office
as Nodal Bank.
d. Nodal Bank shall be responsible for discharging their assigned
roles under the Scheme on behalf of its branches, in its
designated jurisdictional area.
24.4.3 Notification, as well as other di rectives, guidelines, etc., shall flow as
insurance company ► Nodal Bank ► Service (subordinate) Bank
Branch / PACS. While compensation remittance to and from insurance
companies shall follow same route, the remittance of premium shall
follow the reverse route.

24.4.4 Functions of the Nodal Bank would, inter-alia, include:

(i) Communicate Notification, as well as other directives, guidelines,
etc. to all service (subordinate) b ank branches / PACS within their
jurisdictional area.
(ii) Ensure that lending branches / PACS within their jurisdictional
area sanction additional loan component to loanee farmers
towards premium payable by them.
(iii) Ensure that all service (subordinate) bank branches within their
jurisdictional area serve all non-loanee farmers desiring and
eligible to take insurance cover under MNAIS. Such service will
include opening bank account of non-loanee farmers, guiding them
to fill up proposal forms, accepting premium from them and
maintaining records etc.
(iv) Ensure that, for both loanee and non-loanee farmers separately,
premium and related data is remitted to nodal bank within
prescribed time.
(v) Banks should ensure that all the eligible crop loans/seasonal
operational loans taken for notified crop(s) are fully insured and the
conditions stated in the declarations submitted have been
complied with.
(vi) Nodal Bank should ensure submission to insurance companies
within stipulated time the notified crop-wise, insurance unit-wise
Declarations in prescribed format, along with consolidated
Premium payable separately for both loanee farmers and non-
loanee farmers.
(vii) Nodal bank will also arrange for onward transmission to service
(subordinate) bank branches / PACS, compensation amounts as

National Crop Insurance Programme (NCIP)
F. No 13015//02/2012-Credit-II Operational Guidelines
29

received from insurance companies with all details, to be credited
to beneficiary accounts.
(viii) The Nodal Banks may also collect the list of individual insured
farmers with requisite details like name, fathers’ name, Bank
Account number, village, categories – S&M/SC/ST/Women,
insured acreage, insured crop(s), sum insured, premium collected,
Govt. subsidy etc from concerned branch in soft copy for further
reconciliation and send the same to the concerned insurance
company within 15 days after final cut-off date for submission of
proposal to insurance company.
(ix) The insurance company shall acknowledge all the declarations
submitted by the banks mentioning the details of crop, area, sum
insured etc. The banks should cross check with their records and
aberrations, if any, should be brought to the notice of the insurance
company immediately. If no response is received from banks within
15 days, the details given in the acknowledgement shall be
considered final and no changes would be accepted later on.
(x) To credit the claim proceeds of MNAIS received from insurance
company to respective beneficiary bank account within seven
days. The list of beneficiary cultivators with claim amount shall be
displayed by the Branch / Primary Agricultural Cooperative Society
(PACS) and a copy shall also be provided to the
Chairman/Sarpanch/Pradhan of the village Panchayat. The Banks
shall issue a certificate to the insurer that entire money received for
settlement of claims has already been credited into the account of
beneficiaries.
(xi) Soft copy of the beneficiaries farmers may also be provided by
bank branch/PACS through Nodal B ank to concerned Insurance
companies for uploading the same in their web-site.
(xii) To permit insurance company with access to all relevant records /
ledgers at the Nodal Bank / Branch / PACS at all times for the
purpose of implementation of the scheme.
(xiii) Banks should ensure that cultivator may not be deprived of any
benefit under the Scheme due to errors / omissions / commissions
of the Nodal Bank/Branch/PACS, and in case of such errors, the
concerned institutions shall only make good all such losses.

24.4.5 Other Responsibilities of Lending Banks / RFIs will be:

a) To educate the cultivators on the Scheme features.
b) To guide the cultivators for filing up the insurance proposal in the
prescribed forms and collecting the required documents, particularly in
case of Non-Loanee cultivators.
c) To prepare the consolidated st atements for Loanee and Non-Loanee
cultivators and forward the same to the insurance company along with
the premium amount and other details of the insured farmers.

National Crop Insurance Programme (NCIP)
F. No 13015//02/2012-Credit-II Operational Guidelines
30

d) Maintaining the records of proposal forms, the other relevant documents
and statements for the purpose of scrutiny / verification by insurance
company or its authorized representatives and DLMC.
e) Allow insurance company access to all relevant records and registers at
offices of Nodal Bank and service (subordinate) bank branches within
their jurisdictional area.

24.4.6 Under administrative mechanism, banks are designated as terminal
service points for farmers. Hence, it is their duty to ensure compulsory
coverage of all eligible loanee farmers and all interested non-loanee
farmers. In case of any misreporting by Nodal Bank / branch / PACS in
case of farmers coverage, concerned bank only will be liable for such
mis-reporting and its consequences.

24.5 Role & Responsibilities of Insurance Companies:
(i) Insurance company is to liaise with State Governments and agencies /
institutions / committees involved in implementation of MNAIS.
(ii) Calculate the indemnity levels and actuarial premium rates before the
commencement of season, and furnish other necessary details to
SLCCCI as may be required.
(iii) Underwriting – responsibilities of processing and acceptance of risk.
(iv) Claim processing and finalization within 30 days of receipt of yield data
and obtaining approval thereon.
(v) Responsibility for payment of the claims within two weeks of finalization of
claims, subject to receipt of Government subsidy.
(vi) Re-insurance – negotiating arrangements in international market.
(vii) Database – develop crop-yield and weather databases, also related agri-
insurance databases.
(viii) Review of implementation of MNAIS and provide regular feedback for its
effective implementation/improvements to DAC.
(ix) Disclose designated Agents in writing, before the underwriting of
insurance for particular season
(x) Ensuring payment of commission / service charges to banks for
implementing the scheme.
(xi) Awareness and publicity – extens ive efforts to create awareness and
generate publicity for MNAIS at grass-roots level including bank
branches.
(xii) Coordinating with the States and other agencies for awareness and
publicity of the scheme.
(xiii) Providing monthly progress returns / statistics / information demanded by
the Governments, both Central and State Government.
(xiv) Obtain the list of insured farmers & beneficiaries with all requisite details
from Nodal Banks and agents and upload the same in their website well in
time.
(xv) Redressal of all Public Grievances within the time fixed by IRDA.

National Crop Insurance Programme (NCIP)
F. No 13015//02/2012-Credit-II Operational Guidelines
31

(xvi) The coverage of loanee farmers should be carried out by insurance
companies themselves; use of agents / brokers are not allowed.

24.6. Role & Responsibilities of designated Insurance agents:

i) To educate the cultivators on the Scheme features.
ii) To guide the cultivators for filing up the insurance proposal in the
prescribed forms and collecting the required documents from Non-Loanee
cultivators.
iii) Underwrite & collect the premium on behalf of Insurance company, strictly
as per the provisions of the scheme.
iv) To prepare the consolidated statements of Non-Loanee cultivators and
forwarding the same to the insurance company along with the premium
amount well within the stipulated time.
v) The designated Insurance agents shall also prepare the list of individual
insured farmers with requisite details like name, fathers’ name, Bank
Account number, village, categories – S&M/SC/ST/Women, insured
acreage, insured crop(s), sum insured, premium collected, Govt. subsidy
etc in soft copy and send the same to the concerned insurance company
within five days after final cut-off date.
vi) The designated Insurance agents should ensure that insured farmers may
not be deprived of any benefit under the Scheme due to errors / omissions
/ commissions of them, and if any, the concerned agents / insurance
company shall only make good all such losses. Necessary administrative
and legal action may also be taken for lapses in service/malpractices, if
any, reported.

24.7. Role & Responsibilities of Loanee farmers:

24.7.1 As the Scheme is compulsory for all loanee cultivators availing SAO loans
for notified crops, it is mandatory for all loanee cultivators to insist on
insurance coverage as per provisions of the Scheme.
24.7.2 Any change in crop plan should be brought to the notice of the bank within
one week of sowing.
24.7.3 Insurance Proposals are accepted only upto a stipulated cut-off date,
which will be decided by the SLCCCI . Non-Loanee cultivators desirous of
availing insurance under MNAIS for any notified crop in any insurance unit
may approach nearest bank branch / PACS / 31authorized channel
partner / insurance intermediary of insurance company within cut-off date,
fill-up proposal form completely in prescribed format, submit form and
deposit requisite premium to bank branch / Insurance Intermediary along
with necessary documentary evidence regarding his insurable interest in
cultivating land / crop (e.g. ownership / tenancy / cultivation rights)
proposed for insurance.

National Crop Insurance Programme (NCIP)
F. No 13015//02/2012-Credit-II Operational Guidelines
32

24.7.4 Give information of any post harvest loss due to specified perils of
cyclone in coastal areas resulting in damage to harvested crop lying in
field in “cut & spread” condition to concerned bank branch / financial
institution / channel partner / insurer within 48 hours.

25.1 The important duties in case of Non-Loanee cultivators are as follows:

a) The farmer desiring for coverage should open/operate an account in the
branch of the designated bank, and the details should be provided in the
proposal form.
b) The farmers should mention their land identification number in the
proposal.
c) The farmer must provide documentary evidence with regard to
possession of cultivable land.
d) The cultivator must furnish area sown confirmation certificate.
e) The farmer should ensure that he gets insurance coverage for a notified
crop(s) cultivated/proposed to be cultivated, in a piece of land from a
single source. In other word, Double insurance is not allowed. The
insurance company shall reserve the right to repudiate all such claims
and not refund the premium as well in such cases. Company may also
take legal action against such farmers.

*****

National Crop Insurance Programme (NCIP)
F. No 13015//02/2012-Credit-II Operational Guidelines
33

Component-II: Weather Based Crop Insurance Scheme (WBCIS)

1. NATURE OF THE SCHEME

1.1 Weather Based Crop Insurance Scheme (WBCIS) aims to mitigate the
hardship of the insured farmers against the likelihood of financial loss on
account of anticipated crop loss resulting from weather conditions
including fluctuation in rainfall, temperature, wind, humidity etc.

1.2 While yield index based crop insu rance specifically indemnifies the
cultivator against shortfall in crop yield, WBCIS uses weather parameters
as “proxy‟ for crop yields in compensating the cultivators for deemed crop
losses. Payout structures are developed to compensate cultivators to the
extent of losses deemed to have been suffered by them using the weather
triggers.

2. PARTICIPATING INSURANCE COMPANIES

2.1 The public sector and private sector General Insurance Companies
empanelled by the Department of Agriculture & Cooperation (DAC),
Government of India and selected by concerned State Government /
Union Territory (UT) implement WBCIS. The Insurance Companies
mainly engaged in agriculture / rural insurance business and having
adequate experience, infrastructure, financial strength and operational
capabilities are empanelled by DAC. However, selection of insurance
company from amongst the empanelled insurance companies, is done by
the concerned State Government for implementation of WBCIS in their
State. In case the State intends to use services of more than one
insurance company, State Government may ensure that only one
insurance company operates in each district or notified area for loanee
farmers. However, more than one insurance company can be permitted to
implement the scheme in a district for non-loanee farmers.

2.2 The participating companies should have requisite approval of Insurance
Regulatory and Development Authority (IRDA) to underwrite insurance
business under the Scheme apart from fulfilling other statutory
requirements.

2.3 At the beginning of each crop season, the empanelled insurance
companies are required to submit the Prospective Plan covering details
about their financial strength, infrastructure, solvency margin, business
plan for the season, marketing channel, human resources and strategies
for covering the farmers, alongwith details about the proposed yield-index
products etc to the concerned State Government under intimation to DAC.

National Crop Insurance Programme (NCIP)
F. No 13015//02/2012-Credit-II Operational Guidelines
34

2.4 The performance of the empanelled insurance companies shall be closely
monitored by DAC through the indicators (i) Percentage of claims to total
premium amount of which desirable minimum level for the crop season is
60% and for the last seven crop seasons is average 80% with 60%
weight age (ii) Percentage of number of farmers benefitted to farmers
insured of which desirable minimum level is 33% with 20% weight age (iii)
Percentage of non-loanee farmers to total number of insured farmers etc.
of which desirable minimum level is 50% with 20% weight age. If the
performance is found below par, the said insurance company is liable to
be de-empanelled.

3. SCHEME ACCEPTANCE BY THE STATE GOVERNMENT

3.1 The State Government intending to participate in the Scheme has to
communicate its consent thereto, along with areas and crops selected for
the Scheme. Such consent of the Stat es implies acceptances to abide by
the provisions of the Scheme in totality as spelt out in the text of the
Scheme & operational modalities and other guidelines issued from time to
time.
3.2 State /UT will also make necessary budgetary provision in State / UT
budget, to release premium subsidy for the notified crop(s)/area(s) at
beginning of crop season based on fair estimates and also facilitate
strengthening of weather station network in notified areas / districts.
3.3 The State level Coordination Committee on Crop Insurance (SLCCCI)
presently overseeing the implementation of erstwhile National Agricultural
Insurance Scheme (NAIS) / modified NAIS shall oversee the
implementation of WBCIS of NCIP. The Committee in addition to the
present composition may include repres entatives from State Horticulture
Dept., State Remote Sensing Application Centre, India Meteorological
Department (IMD), farmers’ repres entatives and representatives of
insurance companies approved for the implementation of the scheme.
Besides, SLCCCI may co-opt representatives from other departments /
agencies & other stakeholders as special invitee, if considered necessary.
The States which have not implemented erstwhile NAIS / MNAIS would
constitute SLCCCI on the pattern suggested above.

4. CROPS COVERAGE

i. Major Food crops (Cereals, Millets & Pulses) & Oilseeds
ii. Commercial / Horticultural crops

5. FARMERS COVERED

5.1. All farmers including sharecroppers and tenant farmers growing the notified
crops in the notified areas are eligible for coverage.

National Crop Insurance Programme (NCIP)
F. No 13015//02/2012-Credit-II Operational Guidelines
35

5.2. However, farmers should have insurable interest on the insured crop. The non-
loanee farmers are required to submit necessary documentary evidence of land
records and / or applicable contract / agreements details (in case of
sharecroppers / tenant farmers).

5.3 Compulsory Component

All farmers availing Seasonal Agricultural Operations (SAO) loans from
Financial Institutions (i.e. loanee farmers) for the crop(s) notified are covered on
compulsory basis.

5.4 Voluntary Component

The Scheme is optional for the non-loanee farmers.

5.5 WBCIS is compulsory for loanee farmers for the crop(s) notified by the
State Government in the selected areas(s). However both MNAIS and
WBCIS will continue for implementation for non-loanee farmers who can
choose between MNAIS and WBCIS, and also the insurance company.

5.6 Special efforts shall be made to ensure the maximum coverage of
SC/ST/Women farmers under the scheme. Budget allocation and utilization
under these segments of farmers should be in proportion to SC/ST/Women
population in the respective state.

5.7 Panchayat Raj Institutions (PRIs) s hould be involved at various stages of
implementation of crop insurance schemes particularly in identifications of
the crops & beneficiaries, Extension & awareness creation amongst farmers,
obtaining feed-back of the farmers etc.

6. PERILS COVERED

6.1 Following major weather perils, which are deemed to cause “Adverse
Weather Incidence”, leading to crop loss, shall be covered under the scheme.

a) Rainfall – Deficit Rainfall, Unseasonal Rainfall, Excess rainfall, Rainy
days, Dry-spell, Dry days
b) Relative Humidity
c) Temperature – High temperature (heat), Low temperature (frost)
d) Wind Speed

e) A combination of the above

National Crop Insurance Programme (NCIP)
F. No 13015//02/2012-Credit-II Operational Guidelines
36

f) Hailstorms, cloud-burst may also be covered as Add-on/Index-Plus
products for those farmers who have already taken normal coverage
under WBCIS of NCIP

The perils listed above are only indicative and not exhaustive, any addition
/ deletion may be considered by insurance companies based on
availability of relevant data.

6.2 The State Government shall consider such perils to cover under WBCIS
which are capable of causing severe & quantifiable loss and can be
induced directly or indirectly by change in measurable weather parameters
to capture the losses during the adverse climatic conditions and also have
demonstrated correlation with quantifiable yield losses of crop due to such
perils.
6.3 To the extent possible, only adverse weather incidences which can cause
substantial crop losses should only be covered, or the triggers identified in
such a way that major losses are captured. Too conservative triggers tend
to lead to frequent but smaller payouts, diluting the indemnity principle of
insurance.

6.4 State Governments will also continue to conduct the requisite number of
Crop Cutting Experiments (CCEs) in areas where WBCIS is implemented
to enable the implementing agencies to make analytical study for
assessing performance of Scheme vis-à-vis yield Index based crop
Insurance Schemes (i.e. MNAIS) and Benchmarking of products.

6.5 The specific “Adverse Weather In cidence” with its timing / duration
applicable to a particular Notified crop shall be notified by the SLCCCI.

7 RISK PERIOD (i.e. Insurance Period)

7.1 Risk period would ideally be from sowing period to maturity of the crop.
Risk period depending on the duration of the crop and weather parameters
chosen, could vary with individual crop and reference unit area and would
be notified by SLCCCI before the commencement of risk period.

8 NOTIFICATION:

8.1 State/UT Government should ensure issuance of the notification and its
circulation to all concerned agencies / departments / institutions atleast
one month prior to the commencement of the crop season / risk period.
Notification issued by State government / UT should necessarily contain
following details:

(a) Crops and Reference Unit Areas notified in various districts.

National Crop Insurance Programme (NCIP)
F. No 13015//02/2012-Credit-II Operational Guidelines
37

(b) Sum Insured, Premium rates, and subsidy, as applicable for
various crops.
(c) Term-sheets / product structur es of various crops and RUAs
(d) Seasonality discipline for various activities.
(e) List of Reference and Back-up Weather Stations for each
Reference Unit Area

8.2 Selection of Areas & Crops:

8.2.1. At commencement of each crop season, preferably in the beginning of
March for Kharif and in the beginning of September for Rabi season,
meeting of SLCCCI shall be convened for consideration and approval of
notified crops & areas and also finalization of insurance companies. State
Government shall notify the Crops and Areas which are eligible for
insurance under WBCIS during the season in accordance with the
decision taken in the SLCCCI meeting. The Committee shall, for the
purpose of selection of crops under WBCIS, consider factors such as
availability of historical weather data, minimum cropped area, weather
perils capable of causing significant & quantifiable losses by change in
measurable weather parameters etc.

8.2.2 State Govt. may convene meetings with insurance providers and experts of
Agro-meteorology / agronomy from State Agriculture Universities,
Research Institutes etc. for finalization of triggers, term-sheets and pay-out
etc. before SLCCCI meeting. A Technical Committee may be constituted
by the State Government for selection of crop(s), area(s), weather triggers
under WBCIS, examination of proposals received from the Insurance
Companies, and finalization of term-sheets for the proposed crop(s) /
area(s) based on demonstrated correlation with historical weather & yield
data and further evaluation of products & benefits to the farmers on
insurance principles.
8.2.3 The Scheme shall operate on the principle of “Area Approach” in selected
notified Reference Unit Areas (RAUs). Therefore, State Govt. may notify
the smallest possible areas as insurance units / Reference Unit Areas
(RUAs), which should be preferably, the Village Panchayat / Revenue
Circle / Mandal / Hobli / Block / Tehsil etc.

8.3 Selection of Insurance Company:

8.3.1 Insurance companies shall be selected through a transparent process,
strictly on the basis of experience, relevance of their insurance product
and the overall benefits of the product, premium rate, existence of
infrastructure and quality of services like coverage of farmers & area
specially non-loanee, payouts in terms of quantum & timely settlement
thereof, willingness to do publicity & awareness campaigns etc. States

National Crop Insurance Programme (NCIP)
F. No 13015//02/2012-Credit-II Operational Guidelines
38

should engage only those insurance companies who provide best value
for the premium while maintaining the insurance character of the product.

8.3.2 State Govt. may invite the empanelled companies to discuss the product
specifications to be implemented duri ng ensuing season. Alternatively,
State Govt. may structure its own weather products for the notified crops /
areas and may invite the empanelled insurance companies to submit
proposals in enclosed sealed envelope. State government shall clearly
establish and communicate the product sp ecifications in terms of risk
period, trigger-1, trigger-2, payout rate-1, payout rate-2, phase-wise sum
insured etc., to enable the insurance companies to submit the quotes with
full clarity.

8.3.3 The bidding process shall clearly lay down the evaluation process of the
bids / products submitted by the in surance companies. The bids shall be
opened by the State government / Committee in the presence of
participating insurance companies, and allocation of notified crops / areas
shall be made to insurance companies strictly on the basis of merit with
special focus on product benefits in terms of the maximum claim size,
average claim size, claim size during a known adverse season in the past,
etc.

8.3.4. SLCCCI may open premium rates in the presence of the insurance
companies and allocate the notified cr ops / areas to that company whose
rates are the lowest vis-à-vis the insurance product benefits, as outlined
under 8.3.3. Weighted claim / Weighted premium quoted by a company for
all crops within the district, i.e., Sum of premium x Area sown for all crops
within the district may be the guiding factor for district allocation and further
care shall be taken to select one company for one district / notified area on
merit as stated above.

8.4 Notification of the seasonality discipline, claim settlement
methodology :

8.4.1 State Government /UT shall also notify seasonality discipline at the
commencement of season for various activities under the scheme viz.
submission of insurance proposals, consolidated declarations by banks,
term-sheet/ methodology for claim assessment of losses etc., as per the
provisions of scheme.

8.5 Notification of Reference Weather Station (RWS) and Authorized
Data providers:

8.5.1 SLCCCI based on distance and location and availability of Automatic
Weather Stations / Rain Gauge will appr ove “Reference Weather Stations
(RWS) for RUA ‟s. In addition to RWS for all RUAs, additional weather

National Crop Insurance Programme (NCIP)
F. No 13015//02/2012-Credit-II Operational Guidelines
39

stations designated as Back-up Weather Stations (BWS) shall be notified
for use in case RWS is unable to provide data for any reason. All claims
shall be settled based on data recorded by the RWS. Information of RUAs
along with RWS and back up weather stations shall be covered in
notification issued at the commencement of the season.

9 SUM INSURED:

9.1 The Sum Insured (SI) for each notifi ed crop is pre-defined which is based
on the ‘cost of production’ and is same for loanee and non-loanee farmers
and all companies. The total sum insured of loanee farmer(s) is arrived at
by multiplying the pre-defined Sum Insured with the acreage shown in the
Loan Application Form filled in by the farmer for availing Seasonal
Operational Loan from the Lending Bank. Crop loans disbursed against
hypothecation of jewels / ornaments and loans disbursed to Joint Liability
Group (JLG) for agriculture purpose qualify under compulsory insurance.
Non-loanee farmers will have flexibility to insure smaller amounts but not
less than 50% of limit of sum insured.

9.2 The Sum Insured of the crops may be distributed among the critical
phases of the crops based on the accumulating input costs in its growing
path of the crop during that phase. However, the sum insured assigned to
the subsequent phases may be the summation of its previous phase(s) to
provide adequate compensation on damage of crops at later stages.

10. PREMIUM RATES:
10.1. Before start of each crop season, insurance companies shall work out their
products / detailed term-sheet(s), risk coverage, sum insured, premium
rates, payment of claims and such other parameters and also actuarial
premium as well as net premium rates (premium rates actually payable by
farmers after adjusting premium subsidy) for each crop through standard
actuarial methodology in conformity with provisions of IRDA for
consideration of SLCCCI.
10.2. Actuarial premium rates are capped at 10% for Kharif season and 8% for
Rabi for food crops & oilseeds. However, in case of annual
commercial/horticultural crops, cap of 12% on actuarial rates of premium
will be applicable. In case of the crops whose premium will be higher than
the cap level, then their sum insured will be reduced in proportion to cap
level. These caps may be reviewed & revised after/for every Five Year
Plan Period, if felt necessary. Example:
Assume the original sum insured is Rs. 20,000 / ha., and the actuarial
premium rate is 15% for a cereal crop in Kharif season with a premium cap
of 10%. Insurance company is entitled to collect a premium of Rs. 3,000
as per actuarial premium rate. However, due to premium cap, it can collect

National Crop Insurance Programme (NCIP)
F. No 13015//02/2012-Credit-II Operational Guidelines
40

only Rs. 2,000. While the insurance co mpany shall collect only Rs. 2,000 /
ha., but the sum insured is scaled down on pro rata basis to Rs.
13,333/ha., i.e. Rs. 20,000 multiplied by a factor of Rs. 2,000 / Rs. 3,000.

11. PREMIUM SUBSIDY:
11.1. Subsidy in the Premium is allowed up-front, and the Premium payable by
the cultivators is net of the applicable subsidy.

11.2. Subsidy in premium to all farmers irrespective of their holdings and crop(s)
insured will be applicable as under:

Sr.
No.
Premium Slab Subsidy by Central and State Government on 50 :
50 basis and premium payable by farmer
1. Upto 2% No subsidy.
2. > 2 - 5% 25% subsidy subject to minimum net premium of
2% payable by farmer.
3. > 5 – 8 % 40% subsidy subject to minimum net premium of
3.75% payable by farmer
4. > 8% 50% subsidy subject to minimum net premium of
4.8% and maximum net premium of 6% payable by
farmers.

11.3 The applicable premium subsidy shall be shared by Central and State
Government on 50: 50 basis. No subsidy in premium will be payable
beyond the normal Sum Insured of notified crop.

However, the State government is free to extend additional subsidy over &
above the stipulated subsidy from its budget. In other words, additional
subsidy, if any shall be entirely borne by the State government.

12. SEASONALITY DISCIPLINE/ CUT-OFF DATES:

12.1. The cut off date is uniform for both loanee and non-loanee cultivators. The
State wise cut off dates for different crops shall be based on Crop
Calendar of major crops i.e. Appendix IV of the publication “Agricultural
Statistics at a glance 2012” published by the Directorate of Economics and
Statistics, Department of Agriculture & Cooperation, Ministry of Agriculture,
Government of India (placed as Annexure in the operational guidelines).
For those notified crops which do not find mention in the above mentioned
Annexure, the broad range of seasonality discipline as given in the chart
below, shall apply.

National Crop Insurance Programme (NCIP)
F. No 13015//02/2012-Credit-II Operational Guidelines
41

Activity Kharif Rabi
Loaning period (loan sanctioned) for
Loanee farmers covered on
Compulsory basis.
April to 15th July October to
December
Cut-off date for receipt of Proposals of
farmers (loanee & non-loanee).
31th July 31st December
Cut-off date for receipt of Declarations
of Loanee farmers covered on
compulsory basis & non-loanee
farmers covered on Voluntary basis
from Bank branches to Nodal Banks
Within seven
working days
after cut-off date
to receiving
declaration
Within seven
working days
after cut-off date
to receiving
declaration
Cut-off date for receipt of Declarations
of farmers covered on Voluntary basis
from designated insurance Agent(s) to
Insurance Companies
Within two
working days
after receiving
declaration /
premium.
Within two
working days
after receive
declaration /
premium.
Cut-off date for receipt of Declarations
of Loanee farmers covered on
compulsory basis & non-loanee
farmers covered on Voluntary basis
from Nodal Banks to Insurance
Company
15th August 15 th January
Settlement of claims (subject to receipt
of weather data & Government
subsidy)
Within 45 days
from the
cessation of risk
coverage period
Within 45 days
from the
cessation of risk
coverage period

12.2 Keeping in mind the specialty and catastrophic nature of crop insurance,
SLCCCI shall fix seasonality in such a way that it doesn’t encourage
adverse selection or moral hazards. No relaxation for extension in the
above seasonality/cut off dates shall be considered / granted by this
department however, pre-ponement in cut off dates shall be considered
on case to case basis. If any state/UT extends the above seasonality / cut
off dates on their-own then central share of premium subsidy shall not be
available for the concerned notified crops / areas.

12.3 The banks should strictly follow the cut off dates particularly for accepting
non loanee proposals, submission of Declarations and Premium to the
insurance company and crediting the beneficiary farmers’ accounts for
claims and refund of excess premium.

13. COLLECTION OF PROPOSALS AND PREMIUM AMOUNT:
13.1 The Nodal Banks system under erstwhile NAIS / MNAIS, will continue for
WBCIS of NCIP as well, wherein the implementing insurance company is
not required to deal with all the loan disbursing points and instead, deals

National Crop Insurance Programme (NCIP)
F. No 13015//02/2012-Credit-II Operational Guidelines
42

only with designated Nodal Bank branches, mostly at District / Regional
level. Besides, insurance company may also use the IRDA approved
insurance agents for the purpose.

13.2 Declaration formats to be submitted by Nodal banks should contain details
like reference weather stations, sum insured per unit, premium per unit,
total area insured of the farmers, no. of type of farmers covered (small &
marginal or other) and no. of farmers under various categories (SC, ST,
women) along with their bank account details .

14. Loanee Cultivators (Compulsory coverage):

14.1 For Loanee cultivators, the modalities will be the same as those in the
erstwhile NAIS.
14.2 The lending bank branch shall prepare a statement of Crop-wise and RUA-
wise details of insurance with premium, along with details of individual
insured and remit the same to its Nodal Branch within seven working days
from the cut-off date. Premium amount payable by the cultivator is
financed by the lending bank. In case there is any change in crop sown
from the approved crop plan for sanctioned credit limit, the farmer should
bring it to the notice of the concerned bank branch within seven days of
sowing.
14.3 The Nodal Branch, in turn, shall consolidate these statements from the
Branches and forward the same along with Declaration forms of farmers &
the Premium amount to concerned Insurance Company within seven
days.

14.4 For crop loan sanctioned / advanced through Kisan Credit Cards (KCC),
which are covered under compulsory coverage, banks will maintain all
records and registers, including those relating to compliance with WBCIS
and its seasonality discipline and cut of f dates for submitting declarations
as in case of normal crop loans. Bank branch will segregate coverage
among notified crops, based on acreage mentioned in loan application or
on the basis of actual area sown as declared by the farmer subsequently.

14.5 Crop loans advanced against hypothecation of gold / ornaments are also
eligible for compulsory coverage, subject to insurability of crop and
seasonality discipline.

15. Non-loanee cultivator s (Optional coverage):

15.1 For Non-Loanee cultivators, the total sum insured for each crop is arrived
at by multiplying the pre-defined ‘Sum Insured ’ with the acreage or number
of trees, as applicable shown in the insurance proposal of farmer.

National Crop Insurance Programme (NCIP)
F. No 13015//02/2012-Credit-II Operational Guidelines
43

15.2 Those cultivators desirous of ava iling insurance will fill up Proposal Form
of the Scheme and submit the same to the village level lending point of a
Commercial Bank (CB) or Regional Rural Bank (RRB), or Primary
Agriculture Cooperative/ Credit Society (PACS), District Central Cooperative
Bank (DCCB) with the requisite premium amount after opening an Account
or in an existing Account in their name. The functionaries in Branch / PACS
shall assist cultivators in completing the Proposal form and provide
necessary guidance. While accepting the Proposal and the premium, it shall
be the responsibility of such Branch / PACS to verify the land records,
particulars of acreage/number of trees, sum insured etc. and applicable
contract / agreement details in case of share croppers / tenant farmers. The
Branch / PACS shall thereafter consolidate these particulars and send them
to the respective Nodal Branches within seven working days from the cut-off
date.

15.3 The Nodal Banks shall in turn subm it to concern Insurance Company the
Crop-wise and RUA-wise Insurance Declar ations in the prescribed format,
along with the Premium, within seven days.

15.4 Non Loanee cultivators could also be serviced directly by the
insurance company or its designated agents approved by IRDA for the
purpose. While accepting the Proposal and the Premium, it shall be the
responsibility of Insurance Company or its designated agent to verify the
land records, particulars of acreage / number of trees, sum insured etc. and
applicable contract / agreement details in case of share croppers/tenant
farmers. The designated agents shall remit the premium with
consolidated proposals within 72 hours. However, it’s mandatory that
the Non-loanee cultivators serviced by the designated agents should
hold a bank account in order to fac ilitate remittance of the claim, if
payable.

15.5 The non loanee proposal form should be completely filled up,
including the details of farmer’s bank account and land particulars
specifically plot identification number / survey number etc.

15.6 Declarations received from the Banks / PACS after the cut off date shall
be summarily rejected and the liability, if any, for such declarations shall rest
with the concerned bank. The Banks / PACS, therefore, must not receive
any Proposals after the cut-off date. The Banks / PACS must also ensure
that the consolidated statement alongwith the premium amount is remitted
to the insurance company within the stipulated time, failing which the bank
shall be responsible for payment of claims, if any to the farmers. However,
any dispute in the matter may be referred to DAC, Govt. of India by the
concerned State / Agency.

National Crop Insurance Programme (NCIP)
F. No 13015//02/2012-Credit-II Operational Guidelines
44

15.7 The Nodal Banks may also collect the list of individual insured farmers
(both loanee & non-loanee) with requisite details like name, fathers’ name,
Bank Account number, village, cat egories – S&M/SC/ST/Women, insured
acreage, insured crop(s), sum insured, premium collected, govt. subsidy
etc. from concerned branch in soft copy also for further reconciliation and
send the same to the concerned insurance company within 15 days after
final cut-off date for submission of proposal to the insurance company.

15.8 Insurance companies operating thr ough authorized agents may also
collect the requisite information in respect of non-loanee farmers in
same formats. It is the responsibility of the concerned insurance
companies to collect / obtain the details of the insured farmers (both
loanee & non-loanee) from the bank / financial institutions /
intermediaries / agents and upload the same in their websites.

15.9 Insurance Companies may also verify and satisfy themselves about the
coverage of farmers / crops and up-load the same in their websites within a
month from the date of receipt of proposal forms from nodal banks.

16. CLAIMS PROCESSING, APPROVAL & SETTLEMENT:
16.1 Insurance company shall be responsible for all claims arising out of adverse
weather incidence and shall settle claims strictly as per the terms and
conditions of the scheme mentioned in the notification. In case of adverse
weather incidence all the insured cultivators growing the notified crop in a
RUA shall be deemed to have suffered the same level of adverse weather
condition & same proportion of crop loss and become eligible for the same
rate of claims.
16.2 Claims shall be assessed only on the basis of weather data recorded by
the RWSs or BWS, as the case may be, and the claims process shall
commence once the weather data is rece ived. The weather data providers
should ensure that the exposure conditions of AWS, their standardization /
calibration, maintenance and weather data transmission meet the
guidelines issued by the Government / IMD.

16.3. With majority of the Automatic Weather Stations (AWS) used for servicing
WBCIS coming from the private third party or autonomous bodies, it is
suggested that data providers get accreditation / certification of weather
station equipment (including sensors) the exposure conditions for
installation, regular maintenance, data quality and data reporting, through
an independent agency. The accreditation agency should regularly inspect
certain minimum number of weather stations before certifying. Ideally IMD
should act as the accreditation / certification agency. In case IMD cannot
take up this work, a few third party entities with competence may be

National Crop Insurance Programme (NCIP)
F. No 13015//02/2012-Credit-II Operational Guidelines
45

empanelled to provide accreditation services of the private data providers,
as well as the autonomous bodies.
16.4. Claims processing should be strictly as per the insurance term sheets,
payout structure and the Scheme provisions. Claims shall be worked out as
per the Insurance Declarations received from the Nodal Banks for each
notified area and crop. The claim cheques or particulars of remittance
through e-mode along with claim particulars shall be released / intimated to
individual Nodal Banks, who in-turn will pass on the particulars to the grass
root level lending branches / PACS to enable these points to credit the
same to the accounts of the individual beneficiaries within a week’s time
from the receipt of funds from the implementing insurance companies and
provide a certificate to the insur ance companies along with list of the
farmers benefited. Bank Branch should also display the particulars of
beneficiaries on their notice board. In case of farmers serviced through
designated insurance agents, the claim shall be released directly to the
concerned farmers by way of electronic transfer of money.
16.5. All standard Claims should be processed and paid within 45 days from the
end of the risk period and receipt of the weather data subject to receipt of
premium subsidy from State and Central Govt. Further verification &
collection of relevant documents / papers, if required, in respect of affected
farmers should be completed within a period of 30 days from payment of
standard claims of season.
16.6 Insurance Companies should verify & satisfy themselves about the insured
farmers, crops & areas before approaching the Government for release of
Subsidy. However, in case, the acreage insured under a crop in a RUA or
part thereof is more than the acreage sown for the crop, the claims shall be
proportionately reduced by applying the ‘area sown correction factor’ in
concurrence with the State Govt. The State Government shall be free to
verify the details of individual farmers to arrive at accurate figures of
acreage sown. This verification may be carried out within a maximum
period of three months to avoid delay in settlement of claims.
16.7. Disputed claims / sub-standard cl aims, if any, shall be referred through
State Government to DAC for disposal by the insurance company and the
decision or any interpretation of DAC of provisions of scheme or disputes
shall be binding on all concerned.

17. Claims Calculation

17.1 If observed index value falls below or above, (as the case may be) the
notified trigger value, then claims per unit shall be calculated using
following formulas depending upon index definition:

National Crop Insurance Programme (NCIP)
F. No 13015//02/2012-Credit-II Operational Guidelines
46

Claims per Unit = (Difference between Observed & Notified index
values) X Notional Payout

Overall claims will be ‘Claims per Unit’ X ‘Number of units’

18. Illustration:

In table below, a farmer having 1, 2 and 3 hectares of land in RUAs X, Y
and Z respectively buys an insurance policy having deficit rainfall cover.

Table 1: Deficit Rainfall Cover
Index Aggregate rainfall in mm
during cover phase
Cover Phase, From 1-July
To 15-August
Strike 1 (mm) 200
Strike 2 (mm) 150
Exit (mm) 100
Standard Loss Rate between Strike 1
and Strike 2 –
Notional 1 (Rs / mm / Hectare)
50
Standard Loss Rate between Strike 2
and Exit –
Notional 2 (Rs / mm / Hectare)
80
Standard loss below Exit Nil
Policy Limit (Rs / Hectare) 6500

In table below actual observed index values are mentioned for 3 notified
RUAs during the cover period obtained on the basis of data of RWS.

Table 2:
RUA RWS Strike-
1
Strike
-2
Exit Notiona
l-1
Notional
-2
Policy
Limit
Observed
Index
X A 200 150 100 50 80 6500 300
Y B 200 150 100 50 80 6500 120
Z C 200 150 100 50 80 6500 80

RUA X: In this case notified trigger value is 200. Observed index value is
300. In this case there would be no claim payable as the notified trigger is
not breached.

RUA Y: Here observed index value is 120.
Hence, claims per unit will be: {(200-150)*50}+{(150-120)*80} = Rs. 4900.

For two hectares, overall claims= Rs. 4900 X 2= Rs. 9800/-

National Crop Insurance Programme (NCIP)
F. No 13015//02/2012-Credit-II Operational Guidelines
47

RUA Z: Here observed index value is 80 which has breached the exit level.
Hence in this case the full sum insured assigned to the phase of Rs. 6500
per unit would be payable.

For two hectares, overall claims= Rs. 6500 X 2= Rs. 13000/-

Using the methodology discussed above, total claims will be worked out.

19 Modalities for assessment of loss due to localized perils of Hailstorm
and Cloudburst (Add-on / Index-Plus product)

19.1 The incidence of hailstorm and cloudbursts shall be first brought to the
notice of the insurance company by the farmer(s) / Horticulture / Agriculture
/ Revenue Department of concerned State Government, giving details like
time of occurrence, areas affected, extent of damage caused to crops etc.
through telephone followed by fax, email et c. It shall further be ascertained
by IMD, weather satellite images and press reports etc.

19.2 The grower who suffered crop losses due to these perils will also have to
send the intimation to the concerned office of the insurance company at the
earliest and lodge claim / intimate the loss of insured crop to insurance
company and horticulture Department / Bank providing all details within 48
hours of occurrence of perils.

19.3 The insurance company shall depute the loss assessors within 72 hours
from the receipt of the intimation.

19.4 The losses due to hailstorm and cloudbur st shall be assessed at individual
farm / orchard level jointly by a team comprising of State agriculture /
horticulture department, revenue department, loss assessor(s) deputed by
Insurance company and Central / State Govt. & other concerned agencies.

19.5 The loss shall be assessed as percent loss to the normal crop that would
have produced but for the occurrence of the insured peril. The claim
payable to the grower would be in same proportion to his sum insured
under ‘Add-on’ / ‘Index’ cover.

19.6 The insurance company may utilize the services of State Agriculture /
Horticulture Department, Revenue Department, concerned Bank / PACS at
least in the initial years for jointly assessing the crop losses.

19.7 The insurance company providin g ‘Index Plus’ insurance have to
strengthen their field staff so as to assess farm level losses timely, if and
when the same occur;

National Crop Insurance Programme (NCIP)
F. No 13015//02/2012-Credit-II Operational Guidelines
48

19.8 Losses shall be settled by insurance company within 15 days from receipt
of the survey report and such other documents as may be required for
processing the claim.

20. PUBLICITY & AWARENESS:

20.1 Adequate publicity needs to be given in all the villages of the notified
districts/ areas. All possible means of electronic and print media, farmer’s
fair, exhibitions including SMS mess ages, short films, and documentaries
shall be utilized to create and disseminate awareness, benefits and
limitations of the Scheme among the cultivators and the agencies involved
in implementing the Scheme. Agriculture / Cooperation Departments of the
State in consultation with Insurance Companies shall work out appropriate
Plan for adequate awareness and publicity three months prior to the start of
coverage period.
20.2 The State Government / UT in collaboration with Insurance Companies shall
also chalk out plan for capacity building of the associated agents, banks etc
for effective implementation of the scheme and organize training
workshops/sensitization programme for them in association with
participating insurance companies.

21. REVIEW OF THE SCHEME:

21.1 The Scheme would be reviewed peri odically and necessary modifications /
improvements would be considered.

21.2. State Governments / UT may ensure that products provide comprehensive
insurance coverage to the farmers on sound insurance principles and
provide the best value for the premium. State Government may also
review the progress of scheme periodically and undertake impact
assessment after the completion of each season and send their
suggestion / recommendations to this Department for making further
improvements in the scheme.

22. COMMISSION & BANK CHARGES

22.1 Bank shall be paid se rvice charges @ 4% of the premium collected from
farmers. Rural agents engaged in providing insurance related services to
farmers may be paid appropriate commission as decided by the insurance
company, subject to cap prescribed under IRDA regulations.

23. CAPACITY BUILDING & TRAINING:

23.1 It is proposed to set up an independent and well-equipped Technical
Support Unit under the overall leadership, guidance and monitoring of the

National Crop Insurance Programme (NCIP)
F. No 13015//02/2012-Credit-II Operational Guidelines
49

Ministry of Agriculture, Government of India to monitor implementation of
crop insurance schemes including WBCIS, product structuring,
standardization & Benchmarking of pr oducts, rationalization of premium
rate/subsidy, issuing guideline for installation, maintenance & accreditation
of Weather Stations, creation of national grid for statistical data and for
undertaking other activities assigned to it by DAC, GOI from time to time.

23.2 It is also proposed to provide spec ialized trainings and organize workshops
for the capacity building of the State Government officials and farmers’
groups. State Government may send the name and details of officials
require such specialized training by end of month of May and December,
every year.

24. MONITORING OF THE SCHEME AND SOCIAL AUDIT

24.1 State Level Coordination Committee on Crop Insurance (SLCCCI) of the
concerned States will be responsible for monitoring of the schemes /
programme. However, a National Level Monitoring Committee (NLMC)
under the chairmanship of Joint Secretary (Credit), DAC will monitor the
scheme at national level.

24.2 It is proposed to take following monitoring measures for effective
implementation during each crop season to ensure the benefits to the
farmers:

i) The Nodal Bank(s) / intermediaries may collect the list of individual
insured farmers (both loanee & non-loanee) with requisite details like
name, fathers’ name, Bank Account number, village, categories –
S&M/SC/ST/Women, insured acreage, insured crop(s), sum insured,
premium collected, government subsidy etc. from concerned branch in
soft copy also for further reconciliation and send the same to the
concerned insurance company within 15 days after final cut-off date for
submission of proposal to insurance company.

ii) After receiving the claims amount from the concerned insurance
company, the financial institutions / banks should remit/transfer the claim
amount to the account of beneficiaries farmers and also display the list of
the beneficiaries (both loanee & non-loanee) on the notice board of the
branch within seven days with details of beneficiaries like name of farmers
/ beneficiaries, crops insured, sum insured, amount of claims received etc.
and send a copy to concerned insurance companies with utilization
certificates within 15 days for further verification and audit.

iii) The list of the beneficiaries (bank-wise & RUA-wise) may also be
uploaded / placed in the website of the concerned insurance company

National Crop Insurance Programme (NCIP)
F. No 13015//02/2012-Credit-II Operational Guidelines
50

with proper provisions & mechanisms of public grievance redressal / feed-
back etc.

iv) The Insurance Company should also send a copy of the list of
beneficiaries received from financial banks alongwith the list of
beneficiaries covered through other intermediaries to concerned Gram
Panchayat within one month of disbursement of claims for display the
same at the notice board for social audit etc.

v) 5% of the beneficiaries may be verified by the Regional Offices /
local level Offices of Implementing Insurance Companies and send the
feed back to concerned District Level Monitoring Committee (DLMC) &
State Government / State Level Coordination Committee on Crop
Insurance (SLCCCI).

vi) At least 10% of the beneficiaries verified by the insurance company
may be cross verified by the concerned District Level Monitoring
Committee (DLMC) and send the feedback to State Government.

vii) 1 to 2% of the beneficiaries may be verified by the Head Offices of
insurance company / Independent Agencies appointed by the National
Level Monitoring Committee and send the necessary feed back to DAC.

25. ROLE OF VARIOUS AGENCIES:

For successful implementation and administration of Scheme, roles of
various Agencies / Institutions / Government Departments / Committees are
spelt out as under.

25. 1 Role & Responsibilities of Central Government:
The DAC shall be responsible for the following for smooth implementation
of WBCIS:
(i) Issue necessary guidelines & communication from time to time for
implementation of the Scheme.

(ii) Facilitate providing weather data through India Meteorological Department
(IMD) & other agencies on real-time basis to insurance companies.

(iii) Provide guidelines for Standar dization and benchmarking of insurance
products to be submitted by the insurance companies.

(iv) Ensure that allocation of areas to insurance companies is done by States
in a transparent manner based on the insurance products submitted by
them, their network and the services provided by them in the past.

National Crop Insurance Programme (NCIP)
F. No 13015//02/2012-Credit-II Operational Guidelines
51

(v) Constitute a national level “Technical Advisory Committee (TAC) and
Technical Support Unit (TSU) to monitor implementation of WBCIS,
product structuring, standardization & Benchmarking of products,
rationalization of premium rate / subsidy, issuing guideline for installation
& accreditation of Weather Stations, creation of national grid for statistical
data for the purpose and other matter / directives to insurance companies.

(vi) Release 50% premium subsidy towards DAC committed liability under the
scheme to insurance companies at the beginning of crop season on the
basis of business projections (premium collection) to be submitted by
insurance companies. The balance of premium subsidy, if any for the
season shall be released based on submission of final / actual business
achieved during crop season by insurance companies to enable them to
release claims to beneficiary farmers.

(vii) Undertake the review / impact assessment of the scheme as may be
required from time to time and consider modifications / improvements and
expansion of the scheme.

(viii) Create adequate awareness and publicity of the scheme.

(ix) Organize Capacity building training / workshops for the State Government
officials and other stakeholders.

(x) Interpretation of any provisions of the scheme and decision on any
disputed claim.

25.2 Role & Responsibilities of State government:
(i) The State government through SLCCCI will notify crop wise RUAs and
applicable premium rates etc. well in advance of each crop season.

(ii) To provide the details of crop calendar and package of practices for the
crops and the areas under the scheme for the first year. Weather data is
required to be furnished in the daily format at least for 25 years at the RUA
level proposed to be notified for the scheme, wherever necessary.

(iii) To constitute a Technical Committee with experts in the relevant areas for
finalization of triggers, term-sheets, pay-out etc before SLCCCI meeting
and further evaluation of products and benefits to the farmers.

(iv) To provide necessary agronomic inputs to insurance companies through its
agricultural experts and agricultural university in finalizing the insurance
term-sheet / structure, fixing the payout triggers and the benefits.

National Crop Insurance Programme (NCIP)
F. No 13015//02/2012-Credit-II Operational Guidelines
52

(v) To issue the requisite Notification and communicate to all participating
Lending Banks well in advance of each crop season. The Notification of the
State Government may essentially contain the following information:

9 Crops and Reference Unit Areas notified in various districts.
9 Sum Insured, Premium rates, and subsidy, as applicable for
various crops.
9 Term-sheets / product structures of various crops and RUAs
9 Seasonality discipline for various activities.
9 List of Reference and Back-up Weather Stations for each RUA

(vi) To release its share of Premium Subsidy to insurance companies, in the
beginning of every crop season, based on fair estimates submitted by
them, and settle balance of actual premium subsidy for season as soon as
final figures are submitted by insurance company. In order to ensure timely
release of premium subsidy by the st ates, release of GOI subsidy shall be
made to those states only which have cleared their liability of premium
subsidy excluding the immediate previous crop season.

(vii) To provide the acreage sown data for each season within two months time
from sowing period and ensure correctness of the information.

(viii) To facilitate strengthening and expanding the existing automatic weather
station network so as to facilitate pr oviding the weather data on near real-
time basis.

(ix) To undertake sufficient no. of CCE in the notified area and provide the
yield data to concerned insurance companies for comparison of the
scheme with NAIS / MNAIS and establish correlation between yield and
weather parameters to help in designing of better weather insurance
products, standardization & benchmarking of products etc.

(x) To set up the review and monitoring committee at both, State and District
level under the chairmanship of Principal Secretary (Agriculture /
Cooperation) and District Collector, respectively for periodical review
(preferably monthly) of implementation of scheme and also verify the
coverage etc. on random basis to ensure proper coverage under the
scheme.

(xi) To create adequate awareness and publicity of WBCIS.

National Crop Insurance Programme (NCIP)
F. No 13015//02/2012-Credit-II Operational Guidelines
53

25.3 Role & Responsibilities of Banks / Rural Financial Institutions (RFIs):

25.3.1 For the purpose of the Scheme, the Scheduled Banks and Rural
Financial Institutions (RFIs) engaged in disbursing Seasonal Agricultural
Operations (SAO) loans as per the relevant guidelines of NABARD / RBI
will be reckoned as Lending Banks.
25.3.2 The existing system of Nodal Banks under erstwhile National Agricultural
Insurance Scheme (NAIS) would continue to service the WBCIS. The
Banks in States which have not implement NAIS would create the Nodal
Bank system. Each Scheduled Commercial Bank shall fix Nodal Points
which would deal with insurance company on behalf of its branches in
the District / Region / State. The Nodal Points for Commercial Banks will
be minimum one level above the Loan Disbursing Bank Branches. The
Nodal Points for Cooperative Banks will be District Central Cooperative
Banks (DCCBs) and those for the R egional Rural Banks (RRBs), its
Head Office.
25.3.3 The Controlling / Corporate Offices of Banks shall issue appropriate
instructions to Nodal Points as well as crop loan disbursing branches to
ensure smooth implementation of the Scheme, including providing
service to Non-Loanee cultivators.
25.3.4 Nodal Points would be designated to attend to the following functions:
(i) On receipt of the communication on notification of crops and areas from
the State Government, the Nodal Bank branches / Points will
communicate the same to the branch offices under their control.

(ii) The Lending Banks would advance additional loan to Loanee cultivators to
meet the requirement of the premium payable by the farmer.

(iii) Each such Nodal Point would submit the crop-wise, RUA-wise Crop
Insurance Declarations in respect of the loanee cultivators to the Office of
insurance company, in the prescribed format, along with the premium
payable on the Acreage shown in the Loan Application Form. In case of
Non-Loanee cultivators the same is to be submitted on the basis of
Insurance Proposals submitted.

(iv) Banks should ensure that the sanctioned credit limit / the eligible crop
loans / seasonal operati onal loans availed for notified crop(s) are fully
insured and the conditions stated in the Declarations submitted have been
complied with.

(v) The Nodal Banks may also collect the list of individual insured farmers
with requisite details like name, fa thers’ name, Bank Account number,
village, categories – S&M/SC/ST/Women, insured acreage, insured

National Crop Insurance Programme (NCIP)
F. No 13015//02/2012-Credit-II Operational Guidelines
54

crop(s), sum insured, premium collected, government subsidy etc. from
concerned branch in soft copy also for further reconciliation and send the
same to the concerned insurance company within 15 days after final cut-
off date for submission of proposal to insurance company.

(vi) The insurance company shall ack nowledge all the Declarations submitted
by the banks mentioning the details of crop, area, sum insured etc. The
banks should cross check with their records and aberrations, if any, should
be brought to the notice of the insurance company immediately. If no
response is received from banks within 15 days, the details given in the
acknowledgement shall be consider ed final and no changes would be
accepted later on.

(vii) To Credit the claim proceeds of WBCIS received from insurance company
to respective beneficiary bank account within seven days. The list of
beneficiary cultivators with claim amount shall be displayed by the Branch /
Primary Agricultural Cooperative Society (PACS) and a copy shall also be
provided to the Chairman / Sarpanch / Pradhan of the village Panchayat.
The Banks shall issue a certificate to the insurance company that entire
money received for settlement of claims has already been credited into the
account of beneficiary.

(viii) Soft copy of the beneficiaries list may also be provided by bank branch /
PACS through Nodal Bank to concerned Insurance companies for uploading
the same in their web-site.

(ix) To permit insurance company with access to all relevant records / ledgers at
the Nodal Bank / Branch / PACS at all times for the purpose of
implementation of the scheme.

(x) Banks should ensure that cultivator may not be deprived of any benefit
under the Scheme due to errors / omis sions / commissions of the Nodal
Bank / Branch / PACS, and if any, t he concerned institutions shall only
make good all such losses.

(xi) Other Responsibilities of Lending Banks / RFIs will be:

a) To educate the cultivators about WBCIS.
b) To guide the cultivators for filing up the insurance proposal in the
prescribed forms and collecting the required documents, particularly in
case of Non-Loanee cultivators.
c) To prepare the consolidated st atements for Loanee and Non-Loanee
cultivators and forwarding the same to the insurance company along with
the premium amount.

National Crop Insurance Programme (NCIP)
F. No 13015//02/2012-Credit-II Operational Guidelines
55

d) Maintaining the records of proposal forms, the other relevant documents
and statements for the purpose of scrutiny / verification by insurance
company or its authorized representatives.

25.4 Role and Responsibilities of implementing insurance company:
(i) Underwriting Agency of WBCIS.
(ii) Open a separate account for maintaining all transactions under the
scheme in the account for audit by the Government Agency.
(iii) Building crop yield and weather database and determination of actuarial
premium rates using a sound and standard premium rating methodology.
(iv) Claims processing, finalization and payment of the claims within 45 days
of receipt of weather data subject to receipt of Government subsidy.
(v) Disclose designated Agents in writing, before the underwriting of
insurance for particular season.
(vi) Creating ‘Catastrophic Pool’, if required for sharing the catastrophic
losses.
(vii) Negotiating Re-insurance arrangements well in advance.
(viii) Coordinating with the States and other agencies for awareness and
publicity of the scheme.
(ix) Providing monthly progress returns / statistics or any information
demanded by the Governments, both Central and State Government.
(x) Obtain the list of insured farmers & beneficiaries with all requisite details
from Nodal Banks and agents and upload the same in their website well
in time.
(xi) Redressal of all Public Grievances as per the timelines stipulated by
IRDA.
(xii) The coverage of loanee farmers should be carried out by Insurance
companies themselves; use of agents / brokers are not allowed.

25.5 Role & Responsibilities of designated Insurance agents:

i) To educate the cultivators about WBCIS features.
ii) To guide the cultivators for filing up the insurance proposal in the
prescribed forms and collecting the required documents from Non-Loanee
cultivators.
iii) To collect the premium on behalf of Insurance company strictly as per the
provision of WBCIS, and issue acknowledgment / receipt.
iv) To prepare the consolidated statements of Non-Loanee cultivators,
forwarding the same to the insurance company along with the premium
amount well within the stipulated time.
v) The designated Insurance agents may also prepare the list of individual
insured farmers with requisite details like name, fathers’ name, Bank
Account number, village, categories – S&M/SC/ST/Women, insured
acreage, insured crop(s), sum insured, premium collected, government
subsidy etc. in soft copy and send the same to the concerned insurance
company within 5 days after final cut-off date.

National Crop Insurance Programme (NCIP)
F. No 13015//02/2012-Credit-II Operational Guidelines
56

vi) The designated Insurance agents should ensure that insured farmers may
not be deprived of any benefit under the Scheme due to errors / omissions
/ commissions of them, and if any, the concerned agents and insurance
company shall only make good all such losses. Necessary administrative
and legal action may also be taken for lapses in service / malpractices, if
any, reported.

25.6 Role & Responsibilities of Weather data providers:

(i) The Automatic Weather Stations (AWSs) and Automatic Rain Gauges
(ARGs) of IMD, State Governments, Agriculture Universities or any other
organizations / institutions and Independent Third Party like NCMSL,
WRMS, Skymet etc. should only be notified as Reference Weather
Stations (RWSs) or Back up Weather Stations (BWSs) which meets the
basic minimum criteria fixed by the IMD / Government for the purpose.
(ii) The data provider should ensure t hat all the equipments, weather sensors
etc. of AWSs / ARGs should be standard, installed properly and regularly
maintained as per the specification of World Meteorological Organisation
(WMO) / guideline issued by IMD / DAC and the equipments should also
be calibrated regularly.
(iii) The data provider should maintain the quality of weather data and
standards for dissemination, retrieval & validation of weather data etc.
(iv) The data provider should work as independent from the insurer (insurance
Company) and insured (farmer).
(v) The data provider should provide weather data in prescribed formats on
near real time basis and certified data within a week from the risk period
to insurance company for timely processing of claims etc.
(vi) The data provider should ensure that insured farmers may not be deprived
of any benefit under the Scheme due to non-functioning of weather
sensors / sub-standard data/ loss of data etc. and if any, the concerned
agency shall only make good all such losses.
(vii) The data provider should get the weather station equipment, exposure
conditions, maintenance, data quality, etc. certified by an accreditation
agency, who may randomly visit some of the weather stations from time to
time.

25.7 Duties of Cultivators:

(i) As the Scheme is compulsory for all Loanee cultivators availing SAO
loans for notified crops, it is mandatory for all Loanee cultivators to insist
on insurance coverage on the basis of acreage shown in the Loan
Application for fixing the MBL, as per provisions of the Scheme.

(ii) Any change in crop plan should be brought to the notice of the bank
within one week of sowing.

National Crop Insurance Programme (NCIP)
F. No 13015//02/2012-Credit-II Operational Guidelines
57

(iii) In respect of Non-loanee cultivators, Insurance Proposals will be
accepted only upto a stipulated cut-off date, which will be decided by the
SLCCCI. Non-Loanee cultivators desirous of availing insurance under
WBCIS will have to approach the nearest bank branch / PACS or
insurance agents within the cut-off date.

(iv) The important duties in case of Non-Loanee cultivators are as follows:

a) The farmer should open / operate an account in the branch of the
designated bank.
b) The farmer must approach the designated branch / PACS, office of
insurance company or insurance agent and submit the proposal form in
the prescribed format.
c) The farmer should mention the land identification number in the
proposal.
d) The farmer must provide documentary evidence in regard to the
possession of cultivable land, if required.
e) The farmer must furnish area sown confirmation certificate, if required.
f) The farmer should ensure that he / she gets insurance coverage for a
notified crop(s) cultivated / proposed to cultivate in a piece of land from a
single source. In other words, double insurance is not allowed. A farmer
found indulging in double / multiple insurances for the same piece of
land / crop, shall not only forfeit the premium, but also face legal action.

26. IMPORTANT CONDITIONS / CLAUSES APPLICABLE FOR
COVERAGE OF RISKS:

32.1. In case of any substantial misreporting by nodal bank /branch particularly of
compulsory farmers coverage, concerned bank only shall be liable for
such misreporting.

32.2. Insured / applicant must have insurable interest. Mere sanctioning /
disbursement of crop loans and submission of proposals / declarations and
remittance of premium by farmer/ bank, without explicit intent to raise the
crop, does not constitute acceptance of risk by insurance company.

27. SERVICE TAX:

33.1 WBCIS is exempted from Service Tax at par with erstwhile NAIS.

28. CATASTROPHIC FUND:

34.1 A Catastrophic fund may be created through contribution of some portion
of premium collected (1 to 2 %) by the insurance companies with the
approval of the regulatory authority (IRDA / General Insurance Council) to

National Crop Insurance Programme (NCIP)
F. No 13015//02/2012-Credit-II Operational Guidelines
58

compensate & mitigate the financial hardship of the farmers in a situation
of catastrophic losses arisen due to sudden violent changes / deviations in
the weather parameters that may be uncontrollable & unavoidable and
falls outside the boundary of the normal coverage limits of coverage.

29. NO CLAIM BONUS / BENEFITS:

35.1 In order to incentivize the farmer s, who received no claims in the past
years in any crop insurance policies, to continue with crop insurance
schemes for subsequent renewals, a premium discount of 10% for no
claims for three consecutive seasons and 15% for four consecutive
seasons and 20% for five or more consecutive seasons will be passed on
to the farmers. The seasons here means only Kharif seasons or only Rabi
seasons. The discount is applicable only on farmers’ share of premium
and is applicable only if the same company gets to implement WBCIS in
the district continuously for the said period.

30. Illustration for preparation of Term sheet:

30.1 Crop season is segregated into 3-4 phases according to important activities
taking place in growth cycle of the crop (i.e. critical stages). For example,
if rainfall period is from 15 th June to 31 st August. The requirement of rain
(water) by the crop plant may also vary fortnightly (i.e. 1-15 th July, 15-31 st
July, 1-15 th August, 16-31 st August, 1-15 th September and so on) or
monthly or such other period that the State Government decides.
Therefore, the requirement of rainfalls / weather parameters should be
assessed for each fortnight / month according to historical data. The pay-
out trigger(s) should be fixed strictly according to demonstrated correlation
with requirement of weather parameters to the crop at each critical stages
and also soil types, topography etc. Product outlines of such product are
given below:

1.

WEATHER BASED CROP INSURANCE SCHEME
TERM SHEET SEASON
State: A District: B Tehsil: C

Crop: D RAU: E Reference Weather Station:: F

DEFICIT RAINFALL
PHASE-I PHASE-II PHASE-II
RAINFALL
VOLUME
PERIOD 15
th
June to 20
th

July
21
st
July to 20
th

August
21
st
August to 25
th

September
TRIGGER 50 mm 80 mm 80 mm

No. of consecutive Dry Days
RAINFALL
DISTRIBUTION
(Consecutive Dry
Days)

PERIOD

1
St
July to 5
th
September
TRIGGER DAYS(>=) 20 2 4

Note: Rainfall of less than 2.5 mm in a day shall not be considered as a rainy day

National Crop Insurance Programme (NCIP)
F. No 13015//02/2012-Credit-II Operational Guidelines
59

2.

EXCESS RAINFALL ON A
SINGLE DAY
PERIOD
15
th
July to 15
th
August

TRIGGER (>)

200 mm

30.2 Example (2), if rainfall period is from 15 th July to 31 st October. The
requirement of rain (water) by the crop plant may also vary fortnightly (i.e.
15-31st July, 1-15th August, 16-31st August, 1-15th September and so on) or
monthly or such other period that the State Government decides on
prevailing weather condition

TERMSHEET FOR WEATHER BASED CROP INSURANCE SCHEME

CROP : A
STATE : B
District : C
Nayab Tehsil : D
Reference Weather Station: E (IMD)

INDEX – A (Excess Rainfall Cover)
Maximum of cumulative rainfall in mm of any 2 consecutive days during the cover period
Cover Phase, From 15-Jul-12 1-Sep-12 1-Oct-12
To 31-Aug-12 30-Sep-12 31-Oct-12
Strike 1 (mm) 80 33 15
Strike 2 (mm) 175 95 45
Exit (mm) 285 200 134
Standard Loss Rate between Strike 1 and Strike 2-
Notional 1 (Rs/mm/Hectare)

7.37

6.45

9.67
Standard Loss Rate between Strike 2 and Exi
t-Notional 2 (Rs/mm/Hectare)
20.91 24.76 30.45
Policy Limit (Rs/Hectare) 3000 3000 3000

INDEX B (Deficit Rainfall Cover)
Aggregate rainfall during the cover phases in mm
Cover Phase, From 25-Jun-12 16-Aug-12
To 15-Aug-12 30-Sep-12
Strike 1 (mm) 475 200
Strike 2 (mm) 270 95
Exit (mm) 25 10
Standard Loss Rate between Strike 1 and
Strike 2-Notional 1 (Rs/mm/Hectare)
7 21
Standard Loss Rate between Strike 2 and
Exit-Notional 2 (Rs/mm/Hectare)
24 62
Policy Limit (Rs/Hectare)

7500 7500

INDEX C (Consecutive Dry Days)
Maximum Number of Consecutive Dry Days (CDD) where dry day is a day with rainfall
less than equal to 2.5mm
Cover Phase, From 5-Jul-12
To 31-Aug-12
Strike 1 (CDD’s) 4
Strike 2 (CDD’s) 10
Strike 3 (CDD’s) 14
Strike 4 (CDD’s) 19
Exit (CDD’s) 24
Payout 1 (Rs/Hectare) for Strike 1 < CDD<=Strike 2 328
Payout 2 (Rs/Hectare) for Strike 2 <CDD <=Strike 3 720

National Crop Insurance Programme (NCIP)
F. No 13015//02/2012-Credit-II Operational Guidelines
60

Payout 3 (Rs/Hectare) for Strike 3 <CDD<=Strike 4 1800
Payout 4 (Rs/Hectare) for Strike 4 <CDD<=Exit 3600
Maximum Payout (RS/Hectare) for CDD > Exit 6000

Combined Policy Limit (Rs/Hectare) –say 30,000
Premium (Rs/Hectare) say 3,000
Farmer’s Share (Rs/Hectare) say 750

Backup reference Weather Stations: X

Data Source IMD / Independent third party like NCMSL, SKYMET,INGEN etc

Settlement Date Within Thirty days from the data released by data provider.

Other Terms & Conditions The Operational Guidelines / Administrative Approval and other instructions issued by
DAC and State Government from time to time.

******

National Crop Insurance Programme (NCIP)
F. No 13015//02/2012-Credit-II Operational Guidelines
61

Component-III: Coconut Palm Insurance Scheme (CPIS)

1. NATURE OF THE SCHEME
1.1 Coconut cultivation is subjected to risks from climatic changes, natural
disasters, pests, diseases etc. and, at times, entire coconut cultivation of a
region, gets wiped out due to natural calamity or onset of pest attack.
Coconut is a perennial crop and losses suffered by farmers due to damage
of this crop, are material and needs to be addressed. Moreover, coconut is
cultivated under rain-fed management and is susceptible to biotic and a-
biotic stresses, it is necessary to mi nimise risk faced by coconut farmers,
predominantly small and marginal, by covering coconut palms with an
insurance scheme.
1.2 Coconut palms are perennial crops, but palm trees are characterized by
periodic system of crop setting and outcomes and hence resemble seasonal
annual crops and should, accordingly, eligible for insurance cover.

2. PARTICIPATING INSURANCE COMPANY

21. The General Insurance Companies authorized by the Department of
Agriculture & Cooperation (DAC), Government of India will implement /
underwrite risks as per the provisions of CPIS.

3. SCHEME ACCEPTED BY THE STATE GOVERNMENT

3.1 The product shall be available to all Coconut growing States/UTs in the
country. The State Government intending to participate in the Scheme has to
communicate its consent thereto, along wi th areas/district(s) selected for the
Scheme. Such consent of the States implies acceptances to abide by the
provisions of the Scheme in totality as spelt out in the text of the Scheme &
Operational Modalities and other guidelines issued from time to time.

3.2 State/UT will also make necessary budgetary provision in State/UT budget, to
release premium subsidy for the notified area(s)/district(s) at beginning of
financial year based on fair estimates and also facilitate strengthening of field
functionaries and extension workers in notified areas/districts.
4. PALM GROWER COVERED:

4.1 Individual farmer/ planter / grower offering at least 5 healthy ‘nut’
bearing palms in contiguous area / plot will be eligible for insurance. The
planter / grower shall, insure all eligible palms within a contiguous area.
Partial insurance of plantation in contiguous area is not allowed.

4.2 Coconut Development Board (CDB) shall make every effort to get all
bearing and healthy palms insured, in cluster villages of district(s).

National Crop Insurance Programme (NCIP)
F. No 13015//02/2012-Credit-II Operational Guidelines
62

5. PALM COVERED:

5.1 Healthy ‘nut’ bearing coconut palms of all varieties i.e. Tall, Dwarf and
Hybrids grown as mono or intercr opped, on bunds, farms or homestead can
be covered.

5.2 Dwarf and Hybrid coconut palms in age range of 4 to 60 year and Tall variety
coconut palms in age range of 7 to 60 year are eligible for coverage.
Unhealthy and senile palms will be excluded from coverage.

5.3 Self-declaration of age group by insured planter / grower in insurance
proposal is acceptable. However, Implementing Agency (IA) may get the
insured palms verified for authenticity, at any time and Insurance becomes
void in the event of wrong declaration of age or any material fact by insured,
concerning the insurance.

6. RISK COVERED:

6.1 The scheme covers following perils leading to death / loss of palm or palm
becoming un-productive:
i. Storm, hailstorm, cyclone typhoon, tornado, heavy rains
ii. Flood and inundation.
iii. Pest and diseases of widespre ad nature causing, irreparable damages
to palm.
iv. Accidental fire, including forest fire and bush fire, lightening
v. Earth quake, landslide and tsunami
vi. Severe drought and consequential total loss

6.2 This insurance policy pays for total loss of palm on account of happening of
perils insured leading to death of insured palm or it's becoming unproductive.
In case, death of palm is not immediate, payment of sum insured will be
payable on production of certificate from Coconut Development Board (CDB)
/ Agriculture / Horticulture Department justifying cause for declaring palm
unproductive. A palm can be declared ‘unproductive’ only when further
growth / rejuvenation of palm is not possible after the same has been
damaged by peril(s) insured, provided palm is removed / felled by insured. In
case farmer / grower wishes to retain unproductive palm as it is (with out
felling), salvage value of 50% of sum insured will be deducted from claim. In
any case, loss of palm will have to be established to occurrence of peril
insured.

National Crop Insurance Programme (NCIP)
F. No 13015//02/2012-Credit-II Operational Guidelines
63

6.3. Exclusions:

6.3.1 No claims shall be payable under the scheme, if number of palm lost due
to operation of peril insured is within 'Franchise' clause (point 9.4). Insurer
will not be liable for any payment, under this policy, for any expenses
incurred by insured in connection with or in respect of loss other than on
account of perils insured. The insurance does not cover following events, in
so far as they are applicable, keeping in view scope of insurance cover:
(a) Loss by Theft, War, Invasion, Civil war. Rebellion, Revolution,
Insurrection, Mutiny, Lock out, Malicious Damage, Conspiracy,
Military/Usurped power, Civil commotion, Confiscation,
Requisition/destruction/damage by order of any Government de-jure /
de-facto / by any public / municipal / local authority including damage
due to power transmission.
(b) Nuclear reaction, nuclear radiation or radioactive contamination.
(c) Impact damage due to aircraft or other falling objects
(d) Willful negligence of insured and any one acting on his behalf.
(e) Damage caused by human, bird or any animal action.
(f) Improper maintenance of palms.
(g) Palm becoming unhealthy & senile.
(h) Natural mortality of the palm, up-rooting of palm traceable to
chiseling of roots.
(i) Loss of capital investment like land cost loss or damage to structures
supporting insured palm, irrigation system, agricultural equipments or
implements.
7. SUM INSURED & PREMIUM:
7.1 The Sum Insured and premium under Coconut Palm Insurance, under
different age groups will be follows:
Coconut Palm age in
years
Sum insured per palm
(Rs.)
Premium per plant/ year
(Rs.)
4th --- 15th 900 9.00
16t h--- 60th 1750 14.00

8. PREMIUM SUBSIDY:
8.1 On premium, 50% subsidy will be paid by Coconut Development Board
(CDB) and 25% by State Government concerned and balance 25% of the
premium will be paid by farmer / grower. In case, the State government
does not agree to bear 25% share of premium, farmers / growers will be
required to pay 50% of premium, if interested in insurance scheme.

National Crop Insurance Programme (NCIP)
F. No 13015//02/2012-Credit-II Operational Guidelines
64

8.2 In case some planters/growers’ association wishes to bear the premium on
behalf of planters/growers, such association may do so if they have
“insurable interest”. However, in any case, the planters/growers shall have to
bear a minimum of 10% premium.

8.3 Premium subsidy amount (50% by CDB and 25% by participating States) will
be released to IA in advance based on estimates, which will be replenished /
adjusted on quarter/year basis.

9. INSURANCE PERIOD/TERM:

9.1 Policies may be issued on annual basis. However, growers/farmers may
obtain a policy for a maximum period of three years for which rebate in
premium @7.5% for two year policy and 12.5% for three year policy will
be provided to the planters/growers.

9.2 Planters / growers can join the scheme any time during the year. However
efforts should be made to insure all eligible farmers/growers by 31 st March.
In case, farmers/growers joine the scheme after 31 st March, then the risk is
covered from 1st day of succeeding month.

9.3 However, loss/death of palms, within 30 days from inception of insurance,
claim is not payable under the scheme, but this condition is not applicable in
case of renewal of insurance before expiry of the policy (i.e. without time
gap).

9.4 The claim is assessed only if number of palms damaged, due to perils
insured are in a contiguous area is more than the palms lost as shown for
different slabs:

Sl.No.

No of Insured Palms in a contiguous
area
Franchise (Palms lost)
1 10-30 1
2 31-100 2
3 > 100 3

10. ISSUE OF INSURANCE POLICY:

10.1 Insurance may be obtained through Coconut Development Board (CDB),
directly from representatives / authorized agents of IA or nearest office of
Agriculture / Horticulture Department or Coconut Producers / Growers
Societies registered under Societies Act or registered with CDB.

National Crop Insurance Programme (NCIP)
F. No 13015//02/2012-Credit-II Operational Guidelines
65

10.2Farmer/Grower who needs to insure his palms should submit the following
documents to the Agri Dept/ CDB / Hort Deptt, as the case may be :.

i. Proposal forms along with premium amount (Preferably DD)
ii. Proof of land record / Plantation or a certificate issued by revenue
authorities to Agri. Dept. / CDB / Hort Deptt,, depending upon the
practice in a State
iii. Declaration by farmer that only healthy palms are insured.
iv. A rough sketch of the plantation with land identification number of
each plot and number of palms therein, the palms should preferably
be numbered.

10.3 Premium will be paid by planter / grower, net off premium subsidy,
through cash, cheque/ bank draft, drawn in favour of IA.

10.4 Certificate of Insurance/cover note will be issued by IA to all individual
insured farmers/growers, within 30 days from receipt of proposal, with
requisite premium.

10.5 IA shall also furnish a consolidated list of insured farmers/ growers, district-
wise to Coconut Development Board (CDB) and Department of Agriculture,
GoI, on quarterly basis.

11. CLAIM ASSESSMENT & SETTLEMENT PROCEDURE:
11.1 Loss of insured palms will be intimated by insured farmers/ Growers to IA
within fifteen days from occurrence of peril, with all relevant details.

11.2 Farmers will not move or shift damaged / lost palms till inspection of
crop by loss assessors is complete.

11.3 The claims may also be intimated through concerned State Government
Call Centers, until Implementing Agency sets up its own call centre.

11.4 Loss assessment certification is required to be furnished by Coconut
Development Board (CDB) / Agriculture / Horticulture Department / State
Agriculture University (SAU), as authorised by IA for each district, justifying
cause for loss of palm, within fifteen days from loss intimation.

11.5 IA, at its discretion may send its representative to assess the loss jointly
with the agency designated to certify the loss.

11.6 IA will release claim to insured planter / grower within one month from
date, all relevant certified details of claim are received in their office.
Release of claim amount, however, is subject to receiving premium subsidy

National Crop Insurance Programme (NCIP)
F. No 13015//02/2012-Credit-II Operational Guidelines
66

from CDB, concerned State and Association / Societies, wherever
applicable.

11.7 Insurance ceases to operate once a full claim is paid.

12. SERVICE CHARGE:

12.1 IA shall pay service charge to Agriculture / Horticulture Department @ 7.5%
of the premium procured by them from the farmers/growers (i.e. on farmers
share only).

12.2 Agriculture / Horticulture Department or State Agriculture University (SAU)
who are involved in certification of losses may also be paid service charges
at rate mutually agreed between concerned agency and IA.

12.3These service charges shall be shared equally between IA and GoI/CDB.

13. PUBLICITY & AWARENESS

13.1 This Scheme requires adequate publicity in all the villages of the notified
districts/ areas. All possible means of the electronic and the print media,
farmer’s fair, exhibitions including SMS messages, short films, and
documentaries would be utilized to create and disseminate the awareness,
benefits and limitations of the Scheme among the Growers/ cultivators and
the agencies involved in implementing the Scheme. Agriculture/Horticulture
Departments of the State in participation with Coconut Development Board
(CDB) & IA will work out appropriate Plan for creating adequate awareness
and publicity among farmers/growers.
13.2 The State Government in support with CDB & IA shall also chalk out plan for
capacity building of the associated Government official etc for effective
implementation of the scheme and organize training
workshops/sensitization programme for them.

14. MONITORING MECHANISM:

14.1 State level Monitoring Committee will be set-up in all implementing
States, consisting of representatives of CDB, IA and State Agriculture /
Horticulture Dept, to monitor progress of scheme. This Committee will
meet, at least once in quarter, to review progress and make suggestions
in popularising the scheme.

14.2 Annual review of scheme will be undertaken by Ministry of Agriculture
(Gol) at end of each year with participation of implementing States,
Coconut Development Board and IA.

National Crop Insurance Programme (NCIP)
F. No 13015//02/2012-Credit-II Operational Guidelines
67

15 SERVICE TAX:
15.1 CPIS is exempted from payment of Service Tax.

16. ROLES OF VARIOUS AGENCIES:

16.1 For successful implementation and administration of Scheme, roles of
various Agencies/Institutions/Gover nment Departments/Committees are
spelt out herein.

16.2 Role & Responsibilities of Central Government
(xii) Coordination with the State Government for giving “ CONSENT” for
implementation of CPIS and issue necessary directives from time to time
for overall and effective implementation.

(xiii) Issue necessary guidelines & communication from time to time for
implementation of Scheme.

(xiv) Release premium subsidy to IA at beginning of crop season on basis of
progress of previous year, taking into account fair estimates submitted by
them, and settle balance of actual premium subsidy for the year, based
on submission of final subsidy figures to enable the company to release
claims to beneficiary farmers/ growers.

(xv) Call for review reports from IA and/or CDB/State Government, as and
when required, and also consider modifications/improvements
recommended.

(xvi) Create extensive awareness and publicity of the scheme amongst
farming community.

(xvii) Organize Capacity building training/workshops for the State Government
officials and other stakeholders.

(xviii) Interpretation of any provisions of scheme and decision on any dispute in
settlement of claims.

16.3 Role & Responsibilities of State Government/UT Administration:
(xviii) Give its “CONSENT” for implementation CPIS in writing to GOI/CDB and
convey acceptance of provisions of CPIS and operational modalities.

(xix) Constitute State Level Monitoring Committee to oversee implementation
of Scheme.

National Crop Insurance Programme (NCIP)
F. No 13015//02/2012-Credit-II Operational Guidelines
68

(xx) Issue necessary directives to all agencies / institutions / government
departments/ committees involved in implementation of Scheme.

(xxi) Notify areas/districts for coverage of Coconut Palms under the scheme.

(xxii) Facilitate providing of necessary inputs from Directorate of
Agriculture/Horticulture and State Agricultural University to IA, as
necessary for working out claims etc.

(xxiii) To release its contribution of Premium Subsidy to IA, in beginning of
every financial year based on fair estimates submitted by them, and settle
balance of actual premium subsidy for year as soon as final figures are
submitted by insurance company.

(xxiv) Create extensive awareness and publicity of Scheme amongst farming
community/ growers through agriculture and extension Departments to
maximize coverage of Palm growers.

(xxv) Issue necessary direction to the official of State Horticulture Department
to collect insurance premium on behalf of IA for coverage of coconut
Palms under CPIS and issue cover note.

(xxvi) Assist insurance company, through Horticulture Department/District
administration or State Agriculture University (SAU) officials for
assessment of Palm losses of individual insured farmers/growers and
issue necessary loss certificates to IA for claim settlement.

16.4 Role & Responsibilities of Coconut Development Board (CDB):
(i) Collect insurance premium on behalf of IA for coverage of coconut
Palms under CPIS and issue cover note.

(ii) Assessment of Palm damage/losses due to insured perils and provide
necessary Loss assessment certification for settlement of claims.

(iii) Provide necessary inputs and supports to the IA for coverage of coconut
palms under the scheme.

(iv) Create extensive awareness and publicity of the scheme amongst
farming community.

(v) Organize Capacity building training /workshops for the State Government
officials and other stakeholders.

National Crop Insurance Programme (NCIP)
F. No 13015//02/2012-Credit-II Operational Guidelines
69

16.5 Role & Responsibilities of Implementing Agency (insurance
company) of India Ltd:
(xvii) Insurance company to liaise with State Governments, GoI and CDB and
committees involved in implementation of CPIS.

(xviii) Underwriting – responsibilities of processing and acceptance of risk.

(xix) Claims processing and finalization within fifteen days of receipt of loss
certificate from authorized agencies and obtaining approval thereon.

(xx) Responsibility for payment of the cl aims within one months of receipt of
losses certificate and other relevant documents, subject to receipt of
Government subsidy.

(xxi) Re-insurance – negotiating arrangements in national & international
market.

(xxii) Review of implementation of CPIS and provide regular feedback for its
effective implementation/improvements to GOI & CDB.

(xxiii) Ensuring payment of commission / service charges to concerned
agencies for implementing the scheme.

(xxiv) Awareness and publicity – extens ive efforts to create awareness and
generate publicity for CPIS at grass- roots level including Palm Growers’
associations etc.

(xxv) Coordinating with the GOI, States, CDB and other agencies for awareness
and publicity of the scheme.

(xxvi) Providing monthly progress returns / statistics or any information
demanded by the Governments, both Central and State Government and
CDB.

(xxvii) Obtain the list of insured farmers/growers & beneficiaries with all requisite
details and upload the same in their website well in time.

(xxviii) Redressal of all Public Grievances within one month.

*****

Appendix IV
Crop Calendar of Major Crops
States/Uts Period Kharif Rabi Summer Kharif Summer Rabi
Paddy Paddy Paddy Bajra Bajra Wheat
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8)
Andhra Pradesh Sowing May-June Nov-Dec March-April Jun(B)-Jul(M)
Harvesting Nov-Dec May-June July-Aug. Aug(B)-Oct(B)
Assam Sowing Feb-March June-July Nov-Dec Nov(B)-Dec(M)
Harvesting June-July Nov-Dec May-June Mar(B)-Apr(E)
Bihar Sowing Jun-Sept. Oct-Nov Feb.-March Nov(M)-Dec(E)
Harvesting April-May July-Aug. Mar(M)-Apr(E)
Goa Sowing
Harvesting
Gujarat Sowing June-July Jun(B)-Jul(E) Feb(B)-Feb(E) Oct(B)-Nov(E)
Harvesting Oct-Nov Sep(B)-Nov(E) May(B)-May(E) Feb(B)-Mar(E)
Haryana Sowing June-July Jun(M)-Jul(B) Oct(E)-Dec(B)
Harvesting Sept-Oct. Oct(M)-Nov(M) Apr(M)-Apr(E)
Himachal PradesSowing May-June Oct(B)-Nov(E)
Harvesting October Apr(M)-Jun(E)
Jammu & KashmSowing April-May Oct(B)-Dec(E)
Harvesting Sept-Oct. May(B)-May(E)
Karnataka Sowing May-June Sept-Oct. Jan.-Feb. Jul(B)-Sep(E) Jan(B)-Feb(E) Oct(B)-Dec(E)
Harvesting Sept-Oct. Jan.-Feb May-June Oct(B)-Nov(E) Apr(B)-May(E) Jan(B)-Feb(E)
Kerala Sowing April-May Sept-Oct. Dec-Jan.
Harvesting Sept-Oct. Dec-Jan. March-April
Madhya PradeshSowing June-July Jun(M)-Jul(E) Oct(M)-Dec(E)
Harvesting Oct-Nov Sep(E)-Dec(M) Feb(M)Apr(E)
Maharashtra Sowing June-July Jun(B)-Jul(E) Oct(B)-Dec(E)
Harvesting Oct-Nov Sep(B)-Oct(E) Feb(B)-Mar(E)
Odisha Sowing May-June June-July Dec-Jan. Jun-Jul Oct-Nov
Harvesting Sept-Oct. Nov-Dec April-May Sep-Oct Mar-Apr
Punjab Sowing May-Oct. Oct(B)-Nov(E)
Harvesting Apr(B)-May(E)
Rajasthan Sowing June-July Jun(B)-Jul(E) Nov(B)-Dec(E)
Harvesting Oct-Nov Sep(B)-Oct(E) Mar(B)-May(E)
Uttar Pradesh Sowing June-July Nov-Dec Jun(B)-Jul(E) Oct(B)-Jan(M)
Harvesting Oct-Nov April-May Oct(B)-Nov(M) Apr(B)-Apr(M)
West Bengal Sowing Nov(B)-Dec(E)
Harvesting Mar(B)-Apr(E)
All India Sowing May-Aug Dec-Jan. Jun-Jul Jan-Feb Oct-Dec
Harvesting Sep-Jan April-May Sep-Nov Apr-May Feb-Jun

Early kharif Kharif
Arhar/Tur Arhar/Tur
(1) (2) (3) (4)
Sowing June (B)-June (M) Jun (M)- July (M)
Harvesting Nov(M).- Dec (E). Dec (M)-Jan.(M)
Sowing June (B)- June(M) Jun (M)-July (M)
Harvesting Nov(B).- Dec (M). Dec. (M) Jan. (M)
Sowing June (B)-June (M) Jun (M)-July (M)
Harvesting Dec(M).-Jan (M). Dec. (M)- Feb. (M)
Sowing June (B)-June (M) Jun (M)-July (M)
Harvesting Nov (M).-Dec (M). Jan.(M)-Feb. (M)
Sowing June (B)-JuneM) July (B)-July (E)
Harvesting Dec (M)- Dec. (E). March (M)-April (E)
Sowing June (B)-JuneM) Jun (M)-July (M)
Harvesting Nov (M). –Dec (M) Jan (M).- Feb.. (M)
Sowing June (B)-June (M) Jun (M)- July (M)
Harvesting Nov (M).-Dec (M) . Dec. (M)-. Jan.(M)
Sowing - July (B)- July (E)
Harvesting - March (M)- April (E)
Sowing June (B)-June (M) Jun (M)-July (M)
Harvesting June (B)-June (M) Jan (M)- Feb. (M)
Sowing June (B)-June (M) -
Harvesting Nov.(M) –Dec (M). -
Sowing June (B)-June (M) Jun (M)- July (M)
Harvesting Nov (M). – Dec (M). Jan(M)-Feb (M)
Sowing June (B)-June (M) -
Harvesting Nov (M).- Dec (M). -
Sowing June (B)-June (M) -
Harvesting Nov. (M)- Dec (M). -
Sowing June (B)-June (M) July (B)- July (E)
Harvesting Nov (M).- Dec (M). March (M)- April (E)
Sowing June (B)-June (M) Jun (M)- July (M)
Harvesting Nov (M).-Dec (M). Jan M)- Feb. (M)
Sowing June (B)-June (M) Jun (M)-July(M)
Harvesting Nov (B).-Dec (M). Dec (M)-Jan. (M)
Sowing June (B)-June (M) Jun (M)- July (M)
Harvesting Nov (M).- Dec (M). Dec (M)-Jan. (M)
Sowing June (B)-June (M) June (B)-July (E)
Harvesting Nov. (M)- Jan (M), Dec (M).- April (E)
States Period
Andhra Pradesh
Karnataka
Maharashtra
Rajasthan
Uttar Pradesh
Tamil Nadu
Gujarat
Bihar
Madhya Pradesh
Uttaranchal
Nagaland
All India
Odisha
Haryana
Punjab
Jharkhand
Chattisgadh
Tripura

Kharif Rabi Mungbean/ Spring/Summer
Mungbean/
Chickpea rabi
Mungbean/ Urdbean Urdbean
Urdbean
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7)
Jun(M) –Jul(E) Oct(B)-Nov(B) Jan(B).-Feb(B)
Sept(M) –Oct(M) Jan(B)-Feb(B) Mar(B)-April(M)
July(B) – Aug(E) Aug(B)-Sep(M). Feb(E)-Mar(M) Oct. (M) – Nov. (M)
Sep(M)-Oct(E) Nov(B) –Dec(M) May(B)-May(M) March (B) – March (E)
July(B) – Aug(E) Feb(E)-April(B) Aug (M)-Aug(E) Oct. (M) – Nov. (M)
Sep(M)-Oct(E) May(B)-June(M) Oct(E)-Nov(B) March (B) – March (E)
Jun-Jul Oct. (B) – Oct. (E)
Sep-Sep Feb. (E) – March (E)
July(B) – Aug(E) Oct. (B) – Nov. (M)
Sep(M)-Oct(E) Feb. (M) – March (E)
July(B) – Aug(E) Feb(E)-April(B) Oct. (M) – Nov. (E)
Sep(M)-Oct(E) May(B)-June(M) March (M) – April (B)
Jul(B)-Aug(E) Feb(E)-April(B)
Sep(M)-Oct(E) May(B)-June(M)
Jun(M) –Jul(E) Oct(B)-Nov(B) Jan(B).-Feb(B) Aug (E) Sept. (E) – Oct. (E)
Sept(M) –Oct(M) Jan(B)-Feb(B) Mar(B)-April(M) Oct(M)-Nov(B) Jan. (M) – Feb. (E)
Jun(M) –Jul(E) Jan(B).-Feb(B)
Sept(M) –Oct(M) Mar(B)-April(M)
Jun(M) –Jul(E) August (E) Oct. (B) – Nov. (B)
Sept(M) –Oct(M) Oct (E) Feb. (M) – March (E)
Jun(M) –Jul(E) Jul(M) Sept (E) – Oct. (E)
Sept(M) –Oct(M) Oct(M) Feb. (M) – March (E)
Jun(M) –Jul(E) Oct(B)-Nov(B) Jan(B).-Feb(B)
Sept(M) –Oct(M) Jan(B)-Feb(B) Mar(B)-April(M)
July(B) – Aug(E) Feb(E)-Mar(M) Oct. (M) – Nov. (E)
Sep(M)-Oct(E) May(B)-May(M) March (M) - April (E)
July(B) – Aug(E) Jul (M)
Sep(M)-Oct(E) Oct (M)
July(B) – Aug(E) Feb(E)-April(B)
Sep(M)-Oct(E) May(B)-June(M)
Jun(M) –Jul(E) Oct(B)-Nov(B) Feb(E)-April(B) Oct(E)
Sept(M) –Oct(M) Jan(B)-Feb(B) May(B)-June(M) Feb(B)
July(B) – Aug(E) Feb(E)-April(B) Oct. (M) – Nov. (E)
Sep(M)-Oct(E) May(B)-June(M) March (M) - April (E)
July(B) – Aug(E) Feb(E)-April(B) Oct. (M) – Nov. (E)
Sep(M)-Oct(E) May(B)-June(M) March (B) - March (E)
July(B) – Aug(E) Jun(M)-Jul(E)
Sep(M)-Oct(E) Sep(E)-Oct(M)
July(B) – Aug(E)
Sep(M)-Oct(E)
States/Uts Period Horsegram
Kharif
Andhra Pradesh Sowing
Harvesting
Assam Sowing
Harvesting
Bihar Sowing
Harvesting
Gujarat Sowing
Harvesting
Chattishgarh Sowing
Harvesting
Haryana Sowing
Harvesting
Jharkhand Sowing
Harvesting
Karnataka Sowing
Harvesting
Kerala Sowing
Harvesting
Madhya Pradesh Sowing
Harvesting
Maharashtra Sowing
Harvesting
Odisha Sowing
Harvesting
Punjab Sowing
Harvesting
Rajasthan Sowing
Harvesting
Tripura Sowing
Harvesting
Sowing
Harvesting
-
Tamilnadu Sowing
Harvesting
Uttar Pradesh Sowing
Harvesting
W.Bengal Sowing
Harvesting
Himachal
Pradesh

State Period Kharif-Soybean Niger(Khaif) Niger(Late Kharif)
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
Madhya Pradesh Sowing June(M)- July(M) June(B) – July(E) Aug(B)- Sept(B)
Harvesting Sept(E)- October(B) Oct(B)- Nov(M) Nov(B)-Dec(B)
Maharashtra Sowing June(M)- July(M) June(B) – July(E) Aug(B)- Sept(B)
Harvesting Sept(E)- Oct(B) Oct(B)- Nov(M) Nov(B)-Dec(B)
Rajasthan Sowing June(E)- July(M)
Harvesting Sept(E)- October(B)
Karnataka Sowing June(M) – July(B) June(B) – July(E) Aug(B)- Sept(B)
Harvesting Sept(E)- Oct(B) Oct(B)- Nov(M) Nov(B)-Dec(B)
Andhra Pradesh Sowing June(M)- July(M) June(B) – July(E) Aug(B)- Sept(B)
Harvesting Sept(E)- Oct(B) Oct(B)- Nov(M) Nov(B)-Dec(B)
Chhatisgarh Sowing June(M)- July(M)
Harvesting Sept(E)- October(B)
Uttar Pradesh Sowing June(E)- July(M)
Harvesting Sept(E)- October(B)
Manipur Sowing June- July
Harvesting Sept(E)- October(B)
Meghalaya Sowing June - July
Harvesting Sept(E)- October(B)
West Bengal Sowing June - July
Harvesting Sept(E)- October(B)
Sowing June(B) – July(E) Aug(B)- Sept(B)
Harvesting Oct(B)- Nov(M) Nov(B)-Dec(B)
Sowing June(B) – July(E) Aug(B)- Sept(B)
Harvesting Oct(B)- Nov(M) Nov(B)-Dec(B)
Sowing June(B) – July(E) Aug(B)- Sept(B)
Harvesting Oct(B)- Nov(M) Nov(B)-Dec(B)
Gujarat
Odisha
Bihar/ Jharkhand

States/Uts Period Rabi Rabi Kharif Rabi Rabi
Gram Masur Pulses/Lentil Pulses/Lentil Pea
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7)
Assam Sowing Oct(M) – Nov(M) Oct(M) – Nov(M)
Harvesting Mar(M)-Apr(M) Mar(M)-April(M)
Bihar Sowing Jun(M)-Ju;l(B) Oct(M) – Nov(M) Oct(M) – Nov(M)
Harvesting Nov(B)-Dec(E) Mar(M)-Apr(M) Mar(M)-April(M)
Chattisgarh Oct(M) – Nov(M) Oct(M) – Nov(M)
Mar(M)-Apr(M) Mar(M)-Apr(M)
Goa Sowing Aug(B)-Sep(E) Dec(B)-Jan(E)
Harvesting Nov(B)-Dec(E) Mar(B)-Mayu(E)
Oct(M) – Nov(M) Oct(M) – Nov(M)
Mar(M)-Apr(M) Mar(M)-Apr(M)
Oct(E) – Nov(M) Oct(E) – Nov(M)
Mar(B)-Apr(M) Mar(B)-Apr(M)
Oct(E) – Nov(M) Oct(E) – Nov(M)
Mar(B)-Apr(M) Mar(B)-Apr(M)
Gujarat Sowing Oct(B)-Nov(E) Oct(M) – Nov(M) Oct(M) – Nov(M)
Harvesting Feb(B)-Mar(E) Mar(M)-Apr(M) Mar(M)-Apr(M)
Haryana Sowing Oct(B)-Oct(M) Oct(M) – Nov(M) Oct(M) – Nov(M)
Harvesting Mar(M)-Mar(E) Mar(M)-Apr(M) Mar(M)-Apr(M)
Karnataka Sowing Oct(B)-Nov(E)
Harvesting Jan(B)-Mar(E)
Madhya Pradesh Sowing Oct(B)-Dec(B) Sep(M)-Nov(E) Oct(E) – Nov(M) Oct(E) – Nov(M)
Harvesting Feb(B)-Apr(B) Feb(M)-Apr(B) Mar(B)-Apr(M) Mar(B)-Apr(M)
Maharashtra Sowing Sep(B)-Oct)E)
Harvesting Feb(B)-Mar(E)
Manipur Sowing Sep-Oct
Harvesting Mar-Apr
Meghalaya Sowing Sep(B)-Oct(E) Sep(B)-Oct(E)
Harvesting Dec(B)-Jan(E) Feb(B)-Mar(E)
Punjab Sowing Jun(B)-Jul(E) Oct. – Nov. Oct. – Nov.
Harvesting March-April March-April
Uttar Pradesh Sowing Oct(B)-Nov(E) Oct(B)-Nov(E) Oct(M) – Nov(M) Oct(M) – Nov(M)
Harvesting Mar(B)-Apr(E) Mar(B)-Mar(E) Mar(M)-Apr(M) Mar(M)-Apr(M)
West Bengal Sowing Nov(M)-Dec(B) Nov(B)-Nov(E) Oct(M) – Nov(M) Oct(M) – Nov(M)
Harvesting Mar(B)-Mar(E) Feb(B)-Mar(E) Mar(M)-Apr(M) Mar(M)-Apr(M)
Tripura Sowing
Harvesting
Jharkhand Sowing
Harvesting
Rajasthan Sowing
Harvesting

States Period
Kharif Rabi Summer/
Spring
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
Andhra Pradesh Sowing Jun(B)-july(E) Nov(M)-Jan(E)
Harvesting Sep(M)-Nov(M) Feb(E)-May(B)
Assam Sowing JulyB)-Aug(E)
Harvesting Nov(B)-Dec(E)
Bihar Sowing
Harvesting
Chattisgarh Sowing
Harvesting
Gujarat Sowing Jun(B)-July(E) Jan(B)-Feb(E)
Harvesting Sep(B)-Nov(E) Apr(B)May(E)
Haryana Sowing
Harvesting
J&K Sowing
Harvesting
Jharakhand Sowing
Harvesting
Karnataka Sowing Jun(B)-jul(E) Nov(M)-Jan(E) Dec(B)-Jan(E)
Harvesting Sep(B) – Oct(E) Feb(E)-May(B) Mar(B)-Apr(E)
MadhyaPradesh Sowing Jun(M)-july(E)
Harvesting Sep(M)-Oct(E)
Maharashtra Sowing Jun(E)-Jul(E) Jan(B)-Feb(E)
Harvesting Oct(B)-Nov(B) Apr(B)May(E)
Odisha Sowing
Harvesting
Punjab Sowing
Rajastan Sowing Jun(B)-jul(E)
Harvesting Oct(B)-Nov(E)
Tamil Nadu Sowing
Harvesting
Uttar Pradesh Sowing Jul(B)-jul(E)
Harvesting Oct(B)-Nov(B)
West Bengal Sowing Jun(E)-jul(B) Oct(E)-Nov(B) Feb(B)-Mar(E)
Harvesting Sep(E)-Oct(B) Jan(E)-
March(B)
May(B)-Jun(E)
Groundnut
Harvesting

(1) (2) (3)
Sowing Oct (B) - Nov (B)
Harvesting Mar (B) – Apr (E)
Sowing Oct (B)- Oct (E)
Harvesting Feb (E)-Mar (E)
Sowing Oct (B)- Nov (B)
Harvesting Mar (B)- Apr (E)
Sowing Oct (B)- Nov (M)
Harvesting Mar (B)-Mar (E)
Sowing Oct (B)- Nov (M)
Harvesting Mar (B)-Mar (E)
Sowing Oct (B)-Oct (E)
Harvesting Mar (B)-Mar (E)
Sowing Oct (B) - Nov (B)
Harvesting Mar (B) – Apr (E)
Sowing Oct (B)-Oct (E)
Harvesting Mar (B)-Mar (E)
Jharkhand Sowing Oct (B) - Nov (B)
Harvesting Mar (B) – Apr (E)
Sowing Oct (B)-Oct (E)
Harvesting Feb (B)-Mar M)
Sowing Oct (B)- Nov (B)
Harvesting Mar (B) – Apr (E)
Sowing Oct (B) - Nov (B)
Harvesting Mar (B) – Apr (M)
Sowing Oct (B)-Oct (E)
Harvesting Mar (B)-Mar(E)
Sowing Oct (B)- Nov(B)
Harvesting Apr (E) –May (M)
Sowing Oct (B)- Nov (B)
Harvesting Apr (E) – May (M)
Sowing Oct (M) –Nov (M)
Harvesting Mar (E) – Apr (E)
States Period Rabi linseed
Assam
Andhra Pradesh
Bihar
M. P.
Chhatisgarh
Maharashtra
Uttar Pradesh
Orrisa
Karnatka
J & K
Punjab
Nagaland
West Bengal
Rajasthan
Himachal Pradesh

Sesame Sesame Sesame Sesame
Kharif Pre Rabi Rabi Summer
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
Sowing June(B)-July(E) Aug(B)- Sept(M) Jan(M)- Feb(E)
Harvesting Oct(M)- Nov(M) Dec(E)- Jan(M) Apr(M)-May(E)
Sowing June(B)-July(E)
Harvesting Oct(M)- Nov(M)
Sowing June(B)-July(E) Jan(M)-Feb(E)
Harvesting Oct(M)- Nov(M) Apr(M)-May(E)
Sowing June(B)-July(E) Aug(B)- Sept(M)
Harvesting Oct(M)- Nov(M) Dec(E)- Jan(M)
Sowing June(B)-July(E) Aug(B)- Sept(M) Jan(M)- Feb(E)
Harvesting Oct(M)- Nov(M) Dec(E)- Jan(M) Apr(M)-May(E)
Sowing June(B)-July(E) Oct(B)-Nov(M) Jan(M)- Feb(E)
Harvesting Oct(M)- Nov(M) Feb(M)- Mar(E) May(M)-
June(M)
Sowing June(B)-July(E)
Harvesting Oct(M)- Nov(M)
Sowing June(B)-July(E) Feb.- March
Harvesting Oct(M)- Nov(M) May(M)-Jun(M)
Sowing Feb(M)-Mar(M)
Harvesting May(M)-
June(M)
Sowing June-July Feb.- March
Harvesting Oct- Nov May -June
Sowing June-July Aug(B)- Sept(M) Oct(B)-Nov(M) Jan.- Feb
Harvesting Oct- Nov Dec(E)- Jan(M) Feb(M)- Mar(E) May(M)-
June(M)
All India Sowing May-July Aug(B)- Sept(M) Oct(B)-Nov(M) Jan.- March
Harvesting Sep-Nov Dec(E)- Jan(M) Feb(M)- Mar(E) May -June
States Period
Andhra Pradesh
Karnataka
Kerala
Madhya Pradesh
Maharashtra
Odisha
Tamil Nadu
Rajasthan
Uttar Pradesh
West Bengal
Gujarat

(1) (2) (3) (4)
Andhra Pradesh Mustard/ Banarasi rai Nov (L)- Dec (E) Feb-March
Assam Toria Nov (L) - Dec (E) Feb-March
Mustard Oct (L) - Nov (L) Feb-March
Toria Sep (L)- Oct(E) Jan-Feb
Yellow Sarson Oct (E) Feb-March
Mustard Oct (E)- Nov(E) March
Toria Sep (L) Dec-Jan
Mustard Oct (L)- Nov(E) Feb-March
Toria Sep (L) Jan
Taramira Nov(E) March
Mustard Oct(L) Feb-March
Yellow Sarson Oct (L) Feb
Mustard Within Oct Feb-March
Toria Sep (L) Dec-Jan
Taramira Nov(E) March
Mustard Oct (L)- Nov (L) March-April
Brown Sarson Within Oct April
Gobhi Sarson Oct (L) - Nov (L) April
Mustard Oct(L)- Nov (E) March-April
Brown sarson Within Oct April-May
Mustard Oct (L) March
Toria Oct (E) Feb-March
Yellow Sarson Oct (E) Feb-March
Karnataka Mustard Within Oct Feb
Mustard Within Oct Feb-March
Toria Sep (L) Dec-Jan
Mustard Within Nov March
Toria Oct (E) Feb-March
Maharashtra Mustard Oct (L)- Nov (E) Feb-March
Mustard Oct (L) - Nov (L) Feb-March
Toria Oct (E) Feb
Yellow Sarson Oct (E) Feb-March
Mustard Oct (L)- Nov (L) March- April
Toria Sep (L) Dec-Jan
Taramira Nov (E) March
Gobhi Sarson Oct (L)- Nov (L) March-April
Karan rai Oct (L)- Nov (L) March-April
Mustard Sep (L) - Oct (L) Feb-March
Taramira Oct (L)- Nov(E) March
Mustard/ Karan rai Oct (L)- Nov (L) March
Toria Sep (L) Dec-Jan
Yellow Sarson Oct (E) March
Mustard Within Oct Feb-March
Toria Sep(L) Dec-Jan
Yellow Sarson Within Oct Feb-March
Mustard Within Oct Feb-March
Toria Oct (L)- Nov (E) Feb
Yellow Sarson Oct (L)- Nov (E) Feb-March
State Rapeseed-Mustard Sowing Time Harvesting Time
Bihar
Chhattisgarh
Delhi
Gujarat
Haryana
Himachal Pradesh
J&K
Jharkhand
Uttar Pradesh
West Bengal
Madhya Pradesh
Manipur
Odisha
Punjab
Rajasthan
Uttaranchal

States Period Castor Safflower
Kharif Rabi Summer/ Spring Kharif Rabi
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7)
Andhra Pradesh Sowing Jun(B)-Aug(E) Oct Jun(B)-Jul(E) October
Harvesting Sep - Nov Jan Oct-Dec Feb
Assam Sowing
Harvesting
Bihar Sowing
Harvesting
Chattisgarh Sowing
Harvesting
Gujarat Sowing Jul-Aug
Harvesting Jan-Feb
Haryana Sowing
Harvesting
J&K Sowing
Harvesting
Jharakhand Sowing
Harvesting
Karnataka Sowing Jun(B)-Aug(E) Oct Dec-Jan Jul-Aug October
Harvesting Sep - Nov Jan Mar-Apr Nov-Dec Feb
Madhya Pradesh Sowing
Harvesting
Maharashtra Sowing Jul(B)-Aug(E) Oct Sep(M)-Oct(M)
Harvesting Oct - Nov Jan Feb-Mar
Odisha Sowing
Harvesting
Punjab Sowing Feb
Rajastan Sowing Jul-Aug
Harvesting Jan-Feb
Tamil Nadu Sowing Jun(B)-Aug(E) Oct
Harvesting Sep - Nov Jan
Uttar Pradesh Sowing
Harvesting
West Bengal Sowing Feb
Harvesting Apr-May
All India Sowing Jun-Aug Oct Feb Jul-Aug October
Harvesting Sep-Nov Jan Apr-May Jan-Feb Feb
Sunflower
Harvesting Apr-May

States/Uts Period Kharif Kharif Rabi
Cotton Maize Maize
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
Andhra Pradesh Sowing Jun(E)-Jul(E) Jun(M)-Jul(M) Oct(E)-Jan(M)
Harvesting Dec(E)-Mar(M) Sep(M)-Oct(E) Feb(E)-May(B)
Bihar Sowing Jun(M)-Jul(B) Oct(M)-Nov(M)
Harvesting Nov(B)-Dec(E) Feb(B)-Mar(B)
Gujarat Sowing May(B)-May(E) Jun(B)-Jul(E)
Harvesting Oct(B)-Apr(E) Sep(B)-Nov(E)
Haryana Sowing Apr(B)-Apr(M) Jul(M)-Aug(B)
Harvesting Oct(M)-Nov(M) Oct(M)-OctE)
Himachal Pradesh Sowing May(M)-Jun(E)
Harvesting Sep(M)-Oct(M)
Karnataka Sowing May(B)-Jun(E) Sep(B)-Oct(E)
Harvesting Sep(B)-Oct(E) Jan(B)-Mar(E)
Kerala Sowing Jun(B)-Octl(E)
Harvesting Dec(B)-Mar(E)
Madhya Pradesh Sowing Jun-Jul Jun(M)-Jul(E)
Harvesting Nov-Dec Aug(M)-Dec(E)
Maharashtra Sowing Jun-Jul Jul(B)-Aug(E)
Harvesting Nov-Dec Oct(B)-Nov(E)
Odisha Sowing Jun-Jul Jun-Ju;
Harvesting Nov-Dec Sep-Oct
Punjab Sowing Apr(B)-Mar(E) MayB)-Jun(E)
Harvesting Sep(B)-Oct(E) Sep(B)-Oct(E)
Rajasthan Sowing Apr(B)-May(E) Jun(B)-Jul(E)
Harvesting Nov(B)-Dec(E) Oct(B)-Nov(E)
Uttar Pradesh Sowing Apr(B)-Jun(E) Jun(B)-Jul(E)
Harvesting Sep(B)-Nov(E) Sep(B)-Sep(E)
West Bengal Sowing Oct(B)-Nov(E) Mar(B)-May(E) Nov(B)-Nov(E)
Harvesting Sep(B)-Sep(E) Jun(B)-Aug(E) Mar(B)-Mar(E)
All India Sowing Apr-Jul Mar-Jul Sep-Jan
Harvesting Sep-Dec Sep-Dec Jan-May

States/Uts Period Kharif Rabi Kharif
Sugarcane Sugarcane Jute
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
Andhra Pradesh Sowing Dec(E)-Jun(M)
Harvesting Dec(E)_May(M)
Assam Sowing Mar(B)-Apr(E)
Harvesting Dec(B)-Jan(E)
Haryana Sowing Feb(M)-Mar(M)
Harvesting Dec(M)-March(E)
Karnataka Sowing Dec(B)-Mar(E)*
Harvesting Aug(B)-May(E)
Kerala Sowing Jun(B)-Oct(E)
Harvesting Oct(B)-Jan(E)
Madhya Pradesh Sowing Oct(B)-Apr(E)
Harvesting Oct(E)-Mar(E)
Maharashtra Sowing Jul(B)-Aug(E)
Harvesting Oct(B)-Nov(E)
Manipur Sowing Feb-Mar
Harvesting Aug-Sep
Odisha Sowing Feb-May May-Jun
Harvesting Nov-Feb Aug-Sep
Punjab Sowing Feb(B)-Mar(E)
Harvesting Nov(B)-Feb(E)
Rajasthan Sowing Mar(B)-Apr(E)
Harvesting Dec(B)-Mar(E)
Tamil Nadu Sowing Dec(B)-Jan(E)***
Harvesting Dec(B)-Jan(E)
Tripura Sowing Feb-May Mar-May
Harvesting Dec-Mar Aug-Sep
West Bengal Sowing Mar(B)-May(E)
Harvesting Jul(B)-Aug(E)
All India Sowing Feb(B)-Aug(E) Jun(B)-Oct(E) Feb-Jun
Harvesting Aug(B)-nov(E) Oct(B)-Jan(E) Aug-Oct
*=Annual; **Early Kharif; ***Early sugarcane
Source : Indian Council of Agricultural Research (Crop Science Division)

Appendix v
Harvesting Season of Major Fruits
State /Uts Mango Apple Banana Lime/Lemon Grapes
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
Andhra Pradesh March - June round the year Aug - Jan. Feb. - April &
Nov. - Dec.
Arunanchal Pradesh July - Sept. Aug.- oct. * Nov.-Jan
Assam May - July round the year round the year Nov.-Jan
Bihar May - July Aug. - Dec. *
Chhatisgarh March - June Feb. - Apr. Nov.-Feb. Dec. - Jan.
Delhi Jun. - Aug. May - July
Goa Jan. -June. round the year
Gujarat April - July Aug. - March Aug. - Nov.
Haryana Jun. - Aug. Nov.-Feb. May - July
Himanchal Pradesh Jun. - Aug. July - Oct. Nov.-Jan. Jan. - Feb.
Jammu & Kashmir July - Aug. Aug. - Nov. Oct. - Nov. June - July &
Nov-Dec
Jharkhand May - July Aug. -Dec. *
Karnataka March-July round the year * Jan. - May
Kerala * *
Madhya Pradesh March-June Feb. - Apr. Nov. - Feb. Dec. - May
Maharashtra March-June round the year Jan. - July Feb. - May
Manipur April - Sept. Sep. - Nov. round the year Oct. - Dec. Nov. - Dec.
Meghalaya June - Aug. Jan. - Feb.
Mizoram May - July June - Dec. Jun - Nov. Dec.& Feb.
Nagaland Jun. - Aug. Aug. - Oct.
Odisha April - June round the year *
Punjab Jun. - Aug. Nov. - March May. -Aug.
Rajasthan May - July round the year May - Sept. March.&May- Aug.
Sikkim Nov.& Jan.
Tamil Nadu April - July round the year May - Sept. March & May.-July
& Sep.- Nov.
Tripura May - July round the year April - Oct. Nov.
Uttar Pradesh April - Sept. Sept. -Nov. July - Sep.
Uttarakhand May - Sept. June - Oct. June - Sept. Sept. - Nov. Dec. & Feb.
West Bengal May - Aug. July - Oct. Jan. - Feb.
Andaman & Nicobar April - July round the year
Chandigarh Jan. - April
D & N Haveli
Daman & Diu May - July round the year
Lakshadweep round the year
Puducherry April - Aug. June - Sept. Nov.-Feb.
* Information not available.
Source : National Horticulture Board

Appendix VI
Harvesting Season of Major Vegetables
State/UT Potato Onion Tomato Cabbage Cauliflower
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
Andhra Pradesh Mar. - Dec. Mar. - June & Nov. - Feb.
Aug. - Dec.
Arunanchal Pradesh - - * * *
Assam Apr.- sep. Dec.. - Mar. Nov. - Mar. Nov. -Mar. Nov. - Mar.
Bihar Mar.- Oct. Feb. -April Oct. - apr. Nov. - Apr. Oct. - apr.
Chhatisgarh Dec.. - Mar. April - June Dec. - Mar. Dec. - Mar. Dec. - Mar.
Delhi July - Oct. April - June Oct. - Mar. Dec. - Mar. Oct. - Mar.
Goa - - - - -
Gujarat round the year Jan. - Mar. * Oct. - Mar. *
Haryana Mar. -May Mar. - May. Oct. - Mar. * Oct. - Mar.
Himanchal Pradesh - - * * *
Jammu & Kashmir - - * * *
Jharkhand Mar. -Oct. Feb. - Apr. Oct. - apr. Nov. - Apr. Oct. - apr.
Karnataka June - Sep. Aug. - Jan. Dec. - Mar. Jan. - Mar.& Dec. - Mar.
Aug. - Oct.
Kerala * - - - -
Madhya Pradesh Dec.. - Mar. Apr. - July Dec. - Mar. Dec. - Mar. Dec. - Mar.
Maharashtra Jan. -July Mar. - May.& * Dec. - Mar. *
Oct. - Dec.
Manipur Apr. - Aug. - Aug. - Dec. Oct. - Feb. Aug. - Dec.
Meghalaya - Mar. - May. Oct. - Mar. Aug. - Mar. Oct. - Mar.
Mizoram June - Oct. - Dec. - Feb. Dec. - Feb. Dec. - Feb.
Nagaland - Jan. - Apr. June - Oct. June. - Oct. June - Oct.
Odisha round the year Feb. -May Sep. - Jan. Dec. - Mar. Sep. - Jan.
Punjab Apr. - June Mar. -May Oct. -Feb. - Oct. -Feb.
Rajasthan Apr. -Nov. Mar. -May Sep. - Dec. Sep. - Dec. Sep. - Dec.
Sikkim - - Oct. -Feb. Oct. - Apr. Oct. -Feb.
Tamil Nadu June -Aug. Oct. - Dec. - Nov. - Jan.& -
Apr. - June
Tripura - - - - -
Uttar Pradesh Mar. - Nov. Feb. - Apr. Sep. - Feb. Dec. - Apr. Sep. - Feb.
Uttarakhand June - Sep. Mar. -May July. - Mar. July. - Mar. July. - Mar.
West Bengal round the year Mar. -May Nov. - Mar. Sep. - Apr. Nov. - Mar.
Andaman & Nicobar - - Jan. - Mar. Jan. - Mar. Jan. - Mar.
Chandigarh - - - - -
D & N Haveli - - - - -
Daman & Diu - - - - -
Lakshadweep - - - - -
Puducherry Mar. - Aug. Mar. -May & - - -
Oct. - Dec. - - -
* Information not available.
Source : National Horticulture Board