F.No. S-15/21/2021-(PG)-DARPG(e-7085)
Government of India
Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances & Pensions
Department of Administrative Reforms and Public Grievance
***
5th Floor, Sardar Patel Bhawan, Sansad Marg,
New Delhi, dated the 23rd August, 2024
OFFICE MEMORANDUM
Subject: Comprehensive guidelines for handling the Public Grievances.
The undersigned is directed to say that in line with the directions of the
Hon’ble PM during his interaction with the Secretaries to the GOI on 29 th June
2024, DARPG has undertaken a review of existing processes to make
CPGRAMS more sensitive, accessible and meaningful to the citizen.
In the past, DARPG had introduced several measures for strengthening
CPGRAMS and also issued a comprehensive guideline to strengthening
Grievance Redressal Mechanism vide this Department OM of even no. dated
27.07.2022, which stand revised/reiterated as under:
1. An integrated user-friendly grievance filing platform
CPGRAMS is a common open platform for registration of complains by
the citizens on any issue against any public authority in Central Government or
States/ UT. It provides role-based access to all Central Ministries/ Departments
as well as States / UTs. In addition to CPGRAMS, Ministries/ Departments are
also having their own public grievance platforms for services rendered by them.
Most of the States too have their own portals for Public Grievances. Integration
of all these platforms is important to provide citizen a single window experience
and wider accessibility to various PG platforms. This will help deduplication and
save time and efforts of officials from resolving same grievances on multiple
portals. Hence integration of all PG portals of Central Government offices and
State/ UTs through API shall be a priority to optimize operational efficiency of all
PG portals.
2. Appointment of Nodal Officer for Public Grievances
Nodal Officer for Public Grievances plays a pivotal role in ensuring that
grievances from citizens are addressed promptly, fairly, and efficiently. While
appointing the Nodal officer for PG, the Ministries shall ensure that the nodal officer
shall have enough experience, competency and authority to deal with the public
complaints. He shall have the knowledge about the work flow and mapping of
officers in each and every vertical in the Ministry/Department including
attached/subordinate/autonomous bodies. In the Ministries/Departments where large
number of Public Grievances are received, it is advised to appoint a dedicated Nodal
officer with independent charge on sufficient rank so as to ensure timely and
qualitative disposal of public grievances.
1
S-15/27/2024-PG division I/2539/2024

3. Role of Nodal Public Grievance officer
An indicative list of activities to be performed by the Nodal Officer for PG is
given as follows:
(i) Effective categorization : Performance of CPGRAMS is based on
the effective categorization of complaints and their mapping with
right authorities. Hence accurate and updated categorization is
critical for grievances reaching the right authority in shortest possible
time. Nodal PG officer, under the guidance of Secretary, shall
undertake review of categorization once in a six months to ensure
their relevance and effectiveness for citizen in filing of grievances.
(ii) Appointment of Nodal Technical GRO: Updating of Grievance
Redressal Officers (GRO) on CPGRAMS along with their mobile
number, ensuring that correct mapping of GROs with the
corresponding categories in CPGRAMS etc. is at the heart of the
faster grievance resolution process. It is suggested that Nodal GRO
appoint a Nodal Technical GRO under him for enabling this process.
Updation of Officers’ information regarding his/her mobile number,
transfer, retirement and all other technical information regarding
CPGRAMS of the Ministry/Department needs to rest with the Nodal
Technical GRO.
(iii) Monitoring pendency: It is the responsibility of the Nodal Officer to
monitor grievances and check quality of disposal. It is the
responsibility of Nodal GROs to ensure that the grievances are
handled with sensitivity and communication to citizens are polite and
respectful.
(iv) Nodal PG officer can view the performance of other GROs in the
nodal PG officer’s dashboard in CPGRAMS. He is expected to utilize
this facility to review the performance of other GROs in his Ministry.
(v) DARPG has created a portal for the feedback collected by BSNL on
the grievances disposed by the GROs on CPGRAMS. The portal
can be accessed on pgportal.gov.in/ccfeedback/ The Nodal officer
is expected to analyze the feedback and work on the areas of
poor/low feedback.
(vi) Root Cause Analysis of Public Grievances to identify areas of
concerns and address them through systemic reforms is one of the
main objectives of the Public Grievance System. DARPG has set up
Data Strategy Unit and developed analytics dashboards powered
with AI for deeper analysis of grievances. The Nodal Officer can use
the facility developed by DARPG to analyse the pain-points in their
schemes/ programmes and address them on a sustainable basis.
(vii) DARPG is publishing monthly reports on CPGRAMS. The Reports
contains relative performance of Ministry / Departments including the
ranking of Ministries on the parameters of Grievance Redressal and
Assessment Index (GRAI). Nodal Officer shall utilize the report for
2
S-15/27/2024-PG division I/2539/2024

improving overall performance and ranking of their
Ministries/Departments.
(viii) Nodal officer shall take note of the complaints appearing in the
newspaper/ social media etc. and take suo moto action on the
complaints.
(ix) At least one day in a month shall be utilized by Nodal GRO for
having meetings with all Grievance Redressal Officers in his
Ministry/Department regarding pendency, quality of redressal and
complaints being received.
4. Setting up a dedicated Grievance Cell in every Ministry
To support the Nodal GRO, a dedicated Grievance Cell shall be set up in
every Ministry. The Cell shall be adequately staffed with resources having domain
knowledge of schemes/ programmes of the Ministry and also having experience and
skill for data analytics and root cause analysis of grievances. The Grievance Cell will
function under the overall supervision of Nodal Grievance Officer.
5. Timelines for resolving the grievances
5.1 The 10 steps reforms initiated in CPGRAMS have significantly brought down
the average resolution time. Keeping this in view, the maximum redressal time
advised by DARPG, for cases in CPGRAMS is further reduced to 21 days. In such
cases, where the redressal requires longer time, an Interim reply may be given
stating the reason for the same and expected timeline when the grievance could be
resolved.

5.2 There might be certain categories of grievances where resolution of grievance
is not possible within the stipulated timelines of 21 days due to procedural intricacies
etc. Ministries/Departments may identify such categories and suggest the timelines
as a guideline to GROs. DARPG will assist Ministries/Departments in this process
through use of an algorithm which will generate the optimal time for resolution of a
particular grievance based on past history.
5.3 The grievances of urgent/priority nature have been identified on the existing
CPGRAMS system based on individual Ministry level prompts. Nodal GROs may like
to validate the tagging of grievances by DARPG and ensure that all GROs prioritize
these grievances while undertaking resolution
6. Escalation process: Appointment of Appellate Authorities
CPGRAMS though by nature is an appeal portal as most of the grievances
filed on CPGRAMS are against the previous disposals on other grievance portals,
yet it offers one more opportunity to the citizen to raise appeal against the disposal of
grievance on CPGRAMS. The appeals are received through CPGRAMS portal or
through feedback call centers. Appeal workflow in CPGRAMS presently requires
appointment of an officer of the Additional /Joint Secretary rank as the Nodal
Appellate Authority (NAA). Sub Appellate Authorities (SAA) may be appointed by the
Ministries/Departments under the NAA to offer localized redressal of appeals against
3
S-15/27/2024-PG division I/2539/2024

GROs. The Appellate Authorities are required to examine the appeal independently
and take a view to allow or reject the appeal. The appeal shall be disposed of in a
maximum of 30 days.
7. Redressal/ Closure of Grievances
7.1 Grievances shall be redressed under ‘ whole of the Government approach ”.
This means that in no case grievance shall be closed by stating “ Does not pertain to
this Ministry/ Department/ Office” or its equivalent language. Efforts shall be made to
transfer the same to the right authority if the subject of the grievance does not
pertain to the receiving Ministry.
7.2 It has also been observed that Grievances are sometimes closed by GRO
after noting that some document/information is not available. It is to submit that there
is an existing mechanism in CPGRAMS to ask additional documentation from the
citizen. GROs may seek any additional information/documents through this
mechanism. They may also call the citizen and get the additional papers, if needed.
7.3 After redressal the grievance GRO shall file a detailed Action Taken Report
(ATR). DARPG has redesigned its existing Action Taken Reports (ATR) on
CPGRAMS to ensure faster closure of frivolous cases and meaningful reporting in
other cases. In such cases identified by the GRO as frivolous, GROs would not
require to submit detailed ATR and feedback will be disabled on such grievances.

7.4 It has been observed that in several cases, while closing the grievance GROs
do not upload the Relied Upon Document. As such, GROs must ensure to upload
any letter/order issued by the Ministries/Department for redressal of grievances.
They also must give valid and speaking reason while closing the grievances, in case
of non-acceptance of request of the citizen.
7.5 The disposed grievance will be treated as closed unless the citizen has ﬁled
the appeal. If the appeal is received from the citizen against the disposed grievance,
the grievance will be treated as closed only after disposal of appeal.
7.6 CPGRAMS has multilingual auto translation facility. This facility shall be
utilized and reply to the citizen shall be given in the language grievance was filed.
7.7 GROs are advised to follow the Standard Operating Procedure for handling
the grievance on CPGRAMS which is enclosed at Annexure to this Circular.
8. Feedback on disposed grievances
8.1 On resolution of grievance, an SMS/email is sent on the registered mobile
number & email address of the citizen. If the citizen is not satisfied with the
resolution, they can provide feedback on the portal and raise appeal on the portal
itself. DARPG has also set up a call center to survey the citizen response on
disposal of grievances. Every disposed of grievances is dialed by the operator and
citizen response on the disposal is obtained.
4
S-15/27/2024-PG division I/2539/2024

8.2 Going forward feedback will be integrated with other mechanisms like
WhatsApp, chatbot etc so that citizens who are not satisfied with their grievance
redressal can file an appeal through any of the above mode of feedback. DARPG
has created a separate portal https://pgportal.gov.in/ccfeedback where all
feedback with call records are available. Nodal PG Officer has been given login
credentials to access this portal. Ministries may use this portal for detailed analysis
of citizen feedback on their programme/ policies and devise internal mechanism to
deal with the feedback to make systemic improvements.
9. Analysis of grievances to review impact of the schemes/
programmes and scope for improvements
9.1 Public grievances are direct feedback from the citizens on performance of
programmes / policies/ service delivery of the Government. Analysis of grievances
provide meaningful insight and indicate the areas that require specific attention.
Analysis of grievances is extremely useful for driving efficiency in government
programmes and policies.
9.2 DARPG has set up Data Strategy Unit and developed two AI powered
analytical tools. These dashboards can be accessed on https://treedashboard.in/
and https://dashboard-pmopg.nic.in/igms2/sign-in. DARPG has already shared
login credentials of both the dashboards with the Ministries. The facility of DSU on
CPGRAMS may be utilized by the Ministries/ Departments for deeper analysis of
their grievances.

10. Benchmarking Performances: Grievance Redressal Assessment
Index (GRAI)
DARPG has introduced a comprehensive Grievance Redressal Assessment
Index (GRAI). The objective of GRAI is to assist the Ministries/Departments to
review, analyses and streamline their internal grievance redressal mechanism with
SWOT analysis. GRAI is based on 4 dimensions of Efficiency, Feedback, Domain
and organizational Commitment. It ranks the Ministries Departments on their relative
performance for effective handling grievances. The rankings are published every
month in the monthly reports on CPGRAMS. An award policy be also introduced to
recognize the best practices in handling Public grievances.
11. Communication and Awareness
The link of CPGRAMS shall be prominently displayed at the homepage of
every Ministry/ Department. The individual schemes/ programmes of the Ministry
shall contain the link of grievance portal/ helpline where citizen can contact in case of
a grievance. Other mediums of communication including social media handles of
Ministry/ Departments shall also be used to create awareness about the grievance/
complaint filing systems in GOI. Success stories and the best practices of
CPGRAMS shall be publicized through PIB Statements and social media handles of
the Ministries.

5
S-15/27/2024-PG division I/2539/2024

12. Training and Capacity Building
DARPG will organize training for GROs on last Friday of every month. User
Manual for GRO interface and Citizen interface are also available for self-learning by
GROs. A course module on CPGRAMS is available in iGOT. Ministries shall utilize
those training facilities to ensure effective and meaningful handling of public
grievance. For training of State GROs, DARPG has collaborated with State ATIs
under its SEVOTTAM scheme. It supports ATI for training @ Rs 1500 per GRO / per
day
13. Review of PG Cases/ PG Appeals in SOMs
To institutionalize the mechanism of grievance resolution, and to ensure quality
disposal, the Secretary of the line Ministries/Departments may review disposal
process of CPGRAMS in Senior O icers Meetings. Secretary/Addl Secretary/Jointﬀ
Secretary should also examine disposal of grievances every week and issue
necessary direction for improvement in quality of disposal.
14. Annexure:
An illustrative Grievance Handling process is annexed to these guidelines and
can be referred to by Nodal GRO/GRO while handling various situations in
grievances.
This issues with approval of Competent Authority.
(Parthasarathy Bhaskar)
Deputy Secretary to the Govt. of India
011-23401429
To
i. All Secretaries to GOI
ii. All Chief Secretaries of States/ UTs
iii. All Heads of autonomous/ Statutory bodies
iv. Nodal Public Grievance officers of Ministries/Department/Attached and
Subordinate organizations of Govt. of India/ State Govts
v. NIC, DARPG
Copy for information to:-
i. PMO (Kind Attention: Sh Amit Khare, Advisor to PM)
ii. Cabinet Secretary
iii. Secretary to the President Secretariat
iv. Secretary General, Rajya Sabha Secretariat
v. Secretary General, Lok Sabha Secretariat,
vi. Secretary (Coordination &PG), Cabinet Secretariat
6
S-15/27/2024-PG division I/2539/2024

Grievance Handling Process - ANNEXURE-A
1. GRIEVANCE HANDLING PROCESS IN CPGRAMS- STEP BY STEP GUIDE
1.1 CPGRAMS is a Centralized portal which receives grievances on various issues
ranging from service delivery, demand under schemes, queries on programmes,
complaints against malpractices, corruption, discrimination, etc. The portal is connected
to all the Ministries/Departments of the Government of India and its States through role-
based access to the officers in the portal. When a citizen lodges a grievance, it gets
redirected to the concerned authorities, ensuring it is resolved within the given time frame.
CPGRAMS is also available in mobile application.
1.2 Going forward Complaints/ grievances received through physical mode/
Whatsapp/Chatbot shall also be registered in CPGRAMS. There is a possibility that the
same grievances have been received by multiple authorities. Hence to avoid duplicate
registrations in CPGRAMS only the authority concerned with the subject and also the
grievance is addressed to them shall register the grievance in CPGRAMS. NIC will
develop a protocol to assign unique code to such grievances registered by the Ministries/
Call center
1.3 After successful registration of the complaint a unique registration ID is generated
through which the citizen can track status of his complaint. On resolution of grievance an
SMS/email is sent to the registered mobile number & email address of the citizen. If the
citizen is not satisfied with the resolution, he can provide feedback on the portal and raise
appeal on the portal itself. In those cases where self -feedback is not available on the
portal, DARPG tries to reach out the citizen through feedback call center to know whether
their grievance has been actually resolved or not Unsatisfied citizen has the option to
reopen / file an appeal through feedback call. The CPGRAMS process can be explained
in the following Chart
1.4 Chart for Grievance Flow:
7
S-15/27/2024-PG division I/2539/2024

2. References in CPGRAMS not falling under the category of Grievance:
2.1 CPGRAMS Guidelines provides that the following category of references do
not fall under the ambit of Public Grievances as they are covered under separate
protocols. Following categories are the illustrative list of such references:
a. RTI Matters
b. Court related / Sub-judice matters
c. Religious Matters
d. Grievances of Government employees concerning service matters
e. Suggestions
d. Anything that impacts upon territorial integrity of the country or friendly
relations with other countries.
2.2 In case complaint is received under any such categories, it can be closed by
the GRO clarifying the rule position to the citizens. DARPG will enhance capability
of system for auto identification of such references. However, till such facility is
created GRO can identify and mark the complaint under the above categories. He is
not supposed to file ATR on those categories and complaints will not go into
feedback loop.
2.3 Sometimes frivolous/Spam / abusive / complaints are also received in
CPGRAMS. DARPG has developed AI capability to filter those complains at the
initial stage. Those grievances are going into Spam box of GRO. If GRO validates
the complaint as frivolous/ SPAM then the complaint will be automatically closed and
no action will be required on such complaints. Those complaints will not be sent for
feedback
8
S-15/27/2024-PG division I/2539/2024

2.4 CPGRAMS also receives suggestions from the citizens. The subject specific
suggestions may be forwarded to the concerned Division of the Ministries and an
acknowledgment may be sent to the citizen. A template for such acknowledgement
will be built in the PG portal. However generic suggestions with no substance can be
simply closed. GRO is not supposed to act on the suggestion. Once GRO identifies
a reference as suggestion, it will not require to file an Action Taken Report and will
not go into feedback loop.
2.5 CPGRAMS also receives lots of references demanding a benefit under a
scheme. Though they are not a grievance as such, however, those demand shall be
noted by the concerned divisions. GRO therefore shall forward all such references to
the concerned division and bulk close such references with a polite rule position.
Such references shall also be identified by the GRO as a new demand under a
scheme and excluded from the feedback loop.
3. Handling complaints:
Different scenarios for a GRO are explained as under:
3.1 Complaint reaches the concerned GRO:
3.1.1 The Grievances shall ordinarily be resolved within a time frame of 21 days.
However, grievances identified as priority by the system or where early action is
critical such grievances shall be attended to promptly and resolved maximum within
3 days.
3.1.2 If the grievance will take time to resolve beyond the stipulated 21 days an
interim reply shall be given to the citizen through interim Action Taken Report (ATR).
After final resolution ATR shall be updated with final response. Interim ATR will not
go for feedback till the complaint is finally resolved.
3.1.3 If the grievance lacks necessary critical information without which it cannot be
processed, the same can be collected either by calling the complainant on his/her
registered number by GRO or through feedback call center or use the feature of
CPGRAMS for seeking additional information from them complainant. Grievances
shall not be closed on the ground of incomplete information without making genuine
effort to reach the complainant and get the complete information. Seeking
information through feedback call center will require to establish a workflow between
GRO and call Center in CPGRAMS. Going forward, DARPG will develop such a
system for the benefit of the GROs.
3.1.5 If GRO is not able to get the requisite information despite his best efforts then
the grievance can be closed. Since the grievances could not be redressed in such
cases those grievances shall not be sent for feedback. They shall be treated under a
separate category “ Closed due to insufficient information”. The feedback call
9
S-15/27/2024-PG division I/2539/2024

Center will inform the citizen that their grievances could not resolved due to lack of
information (specify information) and they can file again with complete information.
3.1.6 While resolving the grievances if GRO has observed any policy/ process issue
that have resulted in grievance he will bring the same to the notice of the concerned
Division in Ministry with a copy to the Nodal PG officer.
3.1.7 If the grievance cannot be resolved the, the response to applicant shall contain
a reasoned explanation for the same. Such grievances shall not go for feedback
loop.
3.2. Complaint got assigned to wrong GRO:

3.2.1 If the grievance does not pertain to GRO, he shall immediately forward the
same to the concerned GRO if he knows the correct mapping. If not than it shall be
forwarded to the Nodal PG officer of his Ministries/Department/ who will find out the
right authority and forward the complaint to them for action. The complaint/
grievance shall be forwarded to the concerned GRO / Nodal; GRO within 48 hours of
receipt of the complaint. In no case complaint/ grievance shall be closed by stating
that “it does not pertain to this Office “.
3.3. Complaints has multiple issues pertaining to different GROs:
If complaint has more than one issue relating to different GROs, the GRO who
has received the complaint will collect input from other GROs and ensure a
coordinated redressal within the timelines of 21 days.
3.4. Grievance pertaining to Schemes of Central Ministries implemented through
States:
Grievances pertaining to the schemes of Government of India shall be
examined and redressed by the concerned Ministries irrespective of the fact that the
scheme is implemented through the State Government. The onus of redressal in
such complaints are on the concerned Ministry. Therefore, Ministries shall seek
information from the implementing agency, examine the reply and take a final call on
the resolution to be provided to the citizen. Such grievances cannot be transferred to
the States for disposal.
3.5. Corruption Complaints:

3.5.1 Complaint relating to corruption, bribery, harassment or having any other
vigilance angle of citizens shall be examined closely under the broad guidelines and
timelines prescribed by the DoPT and CVC and in consultation with the CVO of the
Ministry. If complaints are found worth to take up than an acknowledgement shall be
sent to the complainant. As vigilance cases are governed by the procedure and
rules stipulated by CVC and DoPT, no ATR will be needed to be filed nor will such
complaints/ grievances will go into the feedback. However, after the action is
10
S-15/27/2024-PG division I/2539/2024

completed an ATR for internal use may be preferred by the Ministry/Departments.
From the citizen’s point of view such complaints may be closed with an interim reply
3.5.2 However, if the complaint is found false, malicious, intentional and filed by
habitual complaints time and again then such complainants are flagged and blocked
in CPGRAMS
4. Escalation Process:
4.1 CPGRAMS has multichannel feedback and appeal mechanism. Going
forward, Citizen can file appeal through Portal, Chatbot, WhatsApp and feedback call
center. It shall be ensured that only a single appeal is filed for a grievance.
4.2 Appeals will reach to the officer designated as Appellate authorities. The
appellate authorities are the officers next senior to the GRO in the hierarchy. The
appellate authority will examine the appeal and take an independent view on the
appeal after careful examination of grievances and resolution provided by the GRO.
The appeals shall ordinarily be closed within 30 days. Appeals will not go into
feedback process.
************
11
S-15/27/2024-PG division I/2539/2024