F-No-S-1S/21 | zozr-O I o DS(PG)-DARPG (ZoaS)
Gowernrnent of India
Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances & Pensions
Departrnent of Adrninistrative Reforrns and Public
Grievance
(PG Diwision)
5th FIoo., Sardar Patel Bhawan, Sansad Marg,
New Delhi, dated the 27rh July,2022
OFFICE IVIEIVIOR.ANDIj-M
Subject: Strengthening of Machinery for Redressal of
Putrlic Griewance (CPGRAMS)
The undersigned is directed to say that the Depaftment of
Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances has undertaken a comprehensive
reform of the Centralized Public Grievance Redress and Monitoring System
ICPGRAMSJ to make it more responsive to the needs of the citizens. The
endeavor of the Government is that the individual citizen's voice must be
heard, and citizen must be empowered adequately to repose trust in the system.
In this regard, DARPG has introduced several measures for strengthening
CPGRAMS, viz. Monitoring dashboards for stakeholders facilitate deeper analysis of
grievances, capacity building of stakeholders under the Sevottam Scheme for
effective redressal of grievances, universalization of CPGRAMS ver 7.0 for auto-routing
of grievances to last mile, integration of State portals with CPGRAMS,
operationalization of feedback call centers, developing an inclusive system by using
common service centers, an effective regional language interface into all Languages
listed in the Bth Schedule of the Constitution, and introduction of a Grievance
Redressal Index for ranking Ministries/ Departments.
2. To achieve the obiectives of the CPGRAMS, and to satisfactorily resolve
the grievances of the citizens, the Ministries/Departments need to review,
streamline and strengthen their internal resolution mechanisms. To make
the system effective, the following decisions have been taken:
A. Grievance Redressal Timelines: -
ti) The grievances received on CPGRAMS shall be resolved promptly
as soon as they are received but within a maximum period of 3O
days. In case redressal is not possible within the prescribed time-
frame due to the circumstances such as sub-iudice matters/policy
issues etc., an interim/appropriate reply shall be given to the
citizen.
(ii) The grievances of urgent nature have been mapped on the
CPGRAMS with system specifications and flagged to all the Nodal
Officers/ Grievance Resolution Officers on the CPGRAMS platform.

It shall be incumbent on Grievance Resolution Officers to address
urgent grievances on priority basis.
B. Closure of Grievances: -
i. The disposed grievance will be treated as closed unless the citizen
has filed the appeal. lf the appeal is received from the citizenagainst
the disposed grievance, the grievance will be treated as closed only
after disposal of appeal.
ii. After closure of a grievance, citizens have the option to submit their
feedback and file appeal. To obtain the feedback on the quality of
grievance disposed, an outbound Call Centre has been started' Al[ the
citizens, wilt be contacted by the Call Centre to obtain feedback.
Citizens will be provided the option to file appeal if they are not
satisfied with the grievance disposed.
iii. The feedback received from Citizens by the Feedback Call Centre will
be shared with Ministries/Departments who would be responsible to
devise internal mechanism to deal with the feedback thus received
and to make systemic improvements.
C. Grievance Resolution Process: -
(D) Root Cause Analysis:-
Ministry/Department should regularly analyze the trend of grievances
and conduct a root cause analysis. Based on the analysis of the
grievances the Ministry/ Department may take remedial measures
i. The M inistry/Department will appoint Nodal Grievance Resolution
Officers (GRO) and empower them adequately to resolve public
grievances. Ministry/Department may appoint as many GROs as
deemed necessary based on the number of public grievances received
under the overall supervision of the Nodal Grievance Resolution
Officer.
ii. An Officer senior to the Nodal Grievance Resolution Officer will be
appointed as Nodal Appellate Authority for timely disposal of PG
Appeals. The Nodal Appellate Authority is empowered to appoint Sub-
Nodal Appellate Authorities to dispose PG appeals. The Nodal
Appellate Authority/ Sub Nodal Appellate Authorities arecompetent to
review the process/ guidelines followed by GROs in redressal of
grievances. The Appellate Authority will dispose the grievance within
30 days.
iii. The login ID and password of the GROs will be created by Nodal
Officer of the Ministry/Department' The details of the Nodal PG officer
and Appellate Authority should be updated immediately in case of any
change.

related to policy, procedures and people to reduce the grievances.
Necessary steps to deploy adequate resources and build capacity may
be taken for timely and effective resolution of grievances. Under the
Sevottam Scheme, DARPG will organize training programs in
collaboration with the Institute of Secretarial Training and
Management (ISTM). The Nodal Grievance Officers would be
responsible for capacity building of other Grievance Resolution
Officers.
(E) Review of PG Cases/ PG Appeals in SOM's:-
i. To institutionalize the mechanism of grievance resolution, and to
ensure quality disposal, the Secretary of the M inistry/Department may
review disposal process in Senior Officers Meetings. Secretary may
make a few calls to the citizens to get direct feedback if it is felt
necessary.
ii. Ministries /Departments may also monitor grievances which may be
raised in print and electronic media.
3. This issues with approval of Competent Authority.
n,\d''
(Satish K Jadhav)
Director (PG)
Tel No. 234()7.404
i. Secretaries to the GOI
ii. Chief Secretaries of States/ UTs
iii. Heads of autonomous/ Statutory bodies
iv. Nodal Public Grievance officers of Ministries/Department/Attachedand
Subordinate organizations of Govt. of lndia/ State Govts
v. N lC, DARPG
Copv for information to:
i. PMO (Kind Attention : Sh Amit Khare, Advisor to PM)
ii. Cabinet Secretary
iii. Secretary to the President Secretariat
iv. Secretary General , Rajya Sabha Secretariat
v. Secretary General , Lok Sabha Secretariat,
vi. Secretary [Coordination &PG) , Cabinet Secretariat
To