1

1

Table of Contents
Background ........................................................................................................................................... 3
1. Introduction .................................................................................................................................... 5
2. Vision, Mission and Objectives .................................................................................................. 8
3. Strategic Mission Pillar I: Strengthening the Foundation .................................................... 11
4. Strategic Mission Pillar II: Promoting Vibrancy ...................................................................... 16
5. Strategic Mission Pillar III: Making Cooperatives Future Ready ......................................... 18
6. Strategic Mission Pillar IV: Promoting Inclusivity and Deepening Reach .......................... 21
7. Strategic Mission Pillar V: Entering New and Emerging Sectors ........................................ 23
8. Strategic Mission Pillar VI: Shaping Young Generation for Cooperative Growth ............. 25
9. Monitoring and Implementation Structure .............................................................................. 28

2

List of Abbreviations
Abbreviation Definition
ARDB Agriculture and Rural Development Bank
BBSSL Bharatiya Beej Sahakari Samiti Limited
CEF Cooperative Education Fund
CRCS Central Registrar of Cooperative Societies
DCCB District Central Cooperative Bank
DEH Districts as Export Hubs
EBP Ethanol Blending Programme
ERP Enterprise Resource Planning
FPO Farmer Producer Organization
FISHCOPFED National Federation of Fishermen’s Cooperatives Limited
FFPO Fish Farmer Producer Organization
GDP Gross Domestic Product
GeM Government e-Marketplace
GI Geographical Indication
GoI Government of India
HEI Higher Education Institution
IFFCO Indian Farmers Fertilizer Cooperative Limited
IoT Internet of Things
IPR Intellectual Property Rights
KPI Key Performance Indicators
KRIBHCO Krishak Bharati Cooperative Limited
MoC Ministry of Cooperation
MSCS Multi-State Cooperative Societies
NABARD National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development
NAFCUB National Federation of Urban Cooperative Banks and Credit Societies Limited
NAFED National Agricultural Cooperative Marketing Federation of India Limited
NAFSCOB National Federation of State Cooperative Banks Limited
NCCT National Council for Cooperative Training
NCD National Cooperative Database
NCDC National Cooperative Development Corporation
NCDFI National Cooperative Dairy Federation of India
NCEL National Cooperative Exports Limited
NCOL National Cooperative Organics Limited
NCP National Cooperation Policy
NCUI National Cooperative Union of India
NDDB National Dairy Development Board
NFDB National Fisheries Development Board
NUCFDC National Urban Cooperative Finance & Development Corporation
ODOP One District One Product
ONDC Open Network for Digital Commerce
PACS Primary Agricultural Credit Societies
PMU Project Management Unit
RBI Reserve Bank of India
RCS Registrar of Cooperative Societies
SC/ST Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes
SEI Social Enterprise Incubators
SRO Self-Regulatory Organization
StCB State Cooperative Bank
UCB Urban Cooperative Bank
VAMNICOM Vaikunth Mehta National Institute of Cooperative Management

3

Background

I. Cooperation is embedded in the fabric of Indian society, which drives the spirit
of collaboration to achieve common socio-economic goals.

II. Cooperativism is a socio -economic system based on collective participation,
democratic members’ control, and shared benefits, where individuals voluntarily
unite to form cooperatives for mutual support and economic development. It
embodies a synergistic approach —leveraging the efficiency, innovation, and
market dynamism while championing the equity, inclusivity, and social welfare
principles. This fusion offers a strong alternative to the current economic systems,
providing a model that prioritizes both economic growth and collective well-being.

III. India is home to more than one-fourth of the world's cooperatives, with about one-
third of its rural population directly connected to them as members for their diverse
socio-economic needs.

IV. The Indian cooperative movement has been the flag bearer of a participatory,
people-led development model aimed at socio -economic upliftment at the
grassroots level for more than a century. Coperatives in India are guided by core
cooperative principles and they are owned by members, operated by members,
and for the benefit of members.

V. A separate Ministry of Cooperation was formed in the year 2021 by the Hon’ble
Prime Minister of India, Shri Narendra Modi , to develop the rural economy of the
country, to strengthen the cooperative movement and to take it to every household.

VI. Over the last decade , rural India has witnessed unprecedented development in
terms of physical infrastructure – roads, housing, telecom, electricity, toilets, and
other basic institutional infrastructure. This has raised the aspirations of the rural
population manifold. Now the basic infrastructure has been prepared and the rural
economy needs to be further strengthened, organized and connected to the
market. In such a situation, the cooperative-based economic model will become
the second engine of India's development and will help in achieving the goal of a
developed India by 2047.

VII. The objective of the ‘National Cooperative Policy 2025’ - To realize the vision of
the Hon’ble Prime Minister of India, Shri Narendra Modi, of ‘Sahkar-se-Samriddhi’
(Cooperation to Prosperity) . Under this, the people ’s aspirations and resources
would be integrated with the cooperative system, so that the cooperative sector

4

can contribute significantly to the India's Gross Domestic Product (GDP) and a
new era of inclusive development can begin.

VIII. The Policy recognizes the need to promote the cooperatives as an effective
instrument for economic growth by virtue of their inherent characteristic s of
mutuality, community orientation, equitable distribution of profits , and democratic
functioning. It also acknowledges the critical role of national federations/unions in
the overall development and growth of the cooperative sector.

IX. Under the guidance of Hon'ble Home and Cooperation Minister Shri Amit Shah, a
48-member National -level Committee was constituted by the Ministry of
Cooperation in September 2022 to draft a new cooperation policy. The
chairmanship of this committee was entrusted to Shri Suresh Prabhu, former Union
Minister. The committee comprised members from national/state cooperative
federations and societies across all levels and sectors, representatives from
related Central and State Government Ministries/Departments, and academia.

X. The Policy was drafted after multi-level consultations and regional workshops with
cooperative sector stakeholders and State/UT Governments. The Committee held
17 meetings and 4 regional workshops (in Ahmedabad, Bengaluru, Gurugram, and
Patna), receiving a total of 648 inputs from the consultation process. These inputs
were thoroughly analyzed and incorporated into the policy after elaborate
discussions.

5

NATIONAL COOPERATION POLICY 2025
1. Introduction

1.1. A cooperative is an autonomous association of persons , united voluntarily to
meet their common economic, social , and cultural needs and aspirations
through a jointly owned and democratically member-controlled enterprise.

1.2. India has more than 8 lakh cooperative societies, comprising around 2 lakh
credit cooperatives and 6 lakh non -credit cooperatives. Non-
credit cooperatives primarily operate in sectors such as housing, dairy,
labour, and others , including sugar, consumer, marketing, fisheries, textiles,
services, processing, hospitals, etc. Moreover, with about 30 crore total
members in the cooperative sector, PACS alone have more than 13 crore
members spread across the country.

1.3. The last policy on cooperatives, released in 2002, focused on the basic
dimensions of efficiently organizing economic activities by cooperatives. Over
the last 20 years, the world has witnessed radical changes at individual,
societal, national, and global levels . They have been driven by globalization
and technological advancements, especially in communications and
information technology. Given these developments, it became essential to
revisit the policy and formulate a new one to suit the evolving requirements of
the cooper ative sector and to ensure the sustainability of this sector in the
current economic scenario.

1.4. Recognizing the formation of cooperative societies as a fundamental right
under the Constitution of India and the establishment of a separate Ministry of
Cooperation marked a new era . This era requires transformation of the
cooperative movement with “farmers, women and rural development” at its
centre, along with strengthening cooperative societies, making national
federations lead the way, and ensuring both Central and State Governments
provide the needed support and recognition for these institutions to grow.
Hence, there is an urgent need for a new national policy.

1.5. The vision of ‘Sahkar-se-Samriddhi’ as articulated by the Hon’ble Prime
Minister of India gives an endearing message motivating the stakeholders and
instilling confidence in the sector. It has motivated the Ministry and the
cooperative sector to work together towards achieving the above vision.

6

1.6. The task before the policymakers was to frame a well-crafted policy to create a
roadmap that translates the above vision into reality, by capitalizing on the
young demography, rising aspirations , and advancements
made on the technological front.

1.7. To lay a roadmap for realizing the vision of ‘Sahkar-se-Samriddhi’, through
a well-designed consultative process, the Ministry has formulated the National
Cooperation Policy 202 5. This p olicy intends to facilitate a systematic and
orderly, all-around development of the sector , focused on fast-tracking the
growth of the rural economy.

1.8. Since its e stablishment in 2021, the Ministry of Cooperation has already
undertaken several initiatives to fulfil the above vision. Major initiatives include:
a) Strengthening of cooperative societies
i. New model by-laws to make PACS multipurpose,
ii. SOP (Standard Operating Procedures) launched for the formation of 2
lakh n ew PACS/dairy/fishery primary cooperatives in uncovered
panchayats,
iii. SOP launched for cooperative-led “White Revolution 2.0”,
iv. Multi-purpose PACS to diversify businesses into non-credit areas,
v. World’s largest decentralized grain storage plan at the PACS level,
vi. Cooperative societies included as buyers on the GeM portal, etc.
b) Cooperation among cooperatives
i. Three new multi-state cooperative societies at the national level in the
fields of exports, organic products, and seeds,

ii. SOP launched for nation-wide implementation of cooperation among
cooperatives campaign for primary cooperatives as “Bank Mitra” of
cooperative banks, distribution of RuPay KCC to members of primary
cooperatives, etc.
c) Changes in the Income Tax Act, 1961 for cooperative societies
i. Surcharge for societies with income between ₹1 crore to ₹10 crore
reduced from 12% to 7%,
ii. MAT rate reduced from 18.5% to 15%,
iii. Increase in cash withdrawal limit of cooperatives from ₹ 1 crore to ₹ 3
crore without deducting tax at source, etc.

7

d) Important decisions taken to overcome the difficulties faced by
cooperative banks
i. Establishment of Umbrella Organization for UCBs,
ii. UCBs to open new branches to expand their business
iii. Cooperative banks to make one-time settlements of outstanding loans
like commercial banks, etc.
e) Strengthening of cooperative sugar mills
i. Relief from additional income tax for paying higher sugarcane prices to
farmers up to Fair and Remunerative or State Advised Prices,
ii. Allowed to claim as expenditure payments made to sugarcane farmers
for the period before 2016–17,
iii. GST on molasses reduced from 28% to 5%, etc.
f) Initiatives taken by the Central Registrar's Office and the NCDC
i. Multi-State Co-operative Societies (Amendment) Act, 2023,
ii. Refund to investors of cooperative societies of the Sahara Group,
iii. Formation of new FPO at PACS level by NCDC,
iv. Formation of FFPO by NCDC, etc.
1.9. Carrying forward the intent and the spirit of the above initiatives, this policy
intends to augment and extend the ambit of reforming and revamping
different dimensions of the cooperative sector.

8

2. Vision, Mission and Objectives

Vision: To significantly contribute to India’s collective ambition of becoming ‘viksit'
by 2047 through the promotion of an environment conducive to sustainable
cooperative development, following the vision of 'Sahkar -se-samriddhi'.
Mission: To create an enabling legal, economic, and institutional framework that will
strengthen and deepen the cooperative movement at the grassroots level and
facilitate the transformation of cooperative enterprises into professionally managed,
transparent, technology -enabled, vibrant, and responsive economic entities to
support production by the masses (members).
The policy’s mission will be achieved through six strategic mission pillars as follows:
I. Strengthening the Foundation: Creating a strong foundation for the
cooperative movement.
II. Promoting Vibrancy: Creating a vibrant and self-sustaining ecosystem.
III. Making Cooperatives Future Ready : Transforming cooperatives into
professional and sustainable economic entities.
IV. Promoting Inclusivity and Deepening Reach: Promoting cooperative -led
inclusive development and cooperatives as a people’s movement.
V. Entering New and Emerging Sectors: Promoting the entry of cooperatives
into new and emerging sectors.
VI. Shaping Young Generation for Cooperative Growth: Inspiring the young
generation and providing them with cooperative-oriented experiential learning
that develops connect with the rural cooperative milieu.

9

Objectives: The policy mission will be achieved through the following 16 objectives over
the next 10 years, grouped under six strategic mission pillars:

Strengthening the foundation by

1. Creating a conducive legal and regulatory environment through timely reforms to
provide autonomy, promote transparency, ease of doing business, good
governance, and provide a level playing field for cooperatives

2. Fostering accessible and affordable finance and equal business opportunities akin
to other economic institutions.

3. Enhancing cooperation among cooperatives, strengthening the cooperative
structure, and expanding the geographical reach.

Promoting vibrancy by

4. Promoting the development of a cooperative business ecosystem.

5. Encouraging multi-dimensional expansion , including access to international
markets and increasing members’ income.

Making cooperatives future ready by

6. Enhancing technology adoption for efficient and transparent management.

7. Enabling the transformation of cooperatives into professionally managed
economic entities based on cooperative principles.

Promoting inclusivity and deepening reach by

8. Promoting inclusivity and member centrality, and reaching out to every corner of
the country and the population through the cooperative setup.

9. Promoting cooperatives as a people’s movement, particularly involving youth and
women, to further strengthen the movement.

10

Entering new and emerging sectors by:

10. Promoting and encouraging the entry of cooperatives in new and emerging
sectors.
11. Promoting environment-friendly practices and a circular economy for sustainability.
Shaping Young Generation for Cooperative Growth:
12. Motivating and inspiring youth, especially those in rural and semi -urban areas, to
pursue long-term careers in cooperative enterprises.

13. Promoting the development of standardized, high -quality, cooperative -focused
courses and the creation of authoritative content.

14. Promoting an ecosystem for skilling and upskilling of youth and women for
employment in the cooperative sector.

15. Ensuring the availability of cooperative sector practitioners as part-time resource
persons, quality teachers, instructors, trainers, and visiting faculty in sufficient
numbers, in the cooperative sector.

16. Developing an ecosystem that facilitates the ease of hiring of suitable candidates
by cooperatives and simplifies the job search process for potential candidates.

11

3. Strategic Mission Pillar I: Strengthening the Foundation

The foundation of the cooperative movement will be strengthened by addressing the
challenges, creating an enabling environment, and capitalizing on available opportunities
to ensure its reach to the grassroots level. A conducive legal and regulatory framework,
access to affordable finance, cooperation among cooperatives , and enhancing
geographical reach should be taken as the pathways to achieving this goal.

3.1. To create a conducive legal and regulatory environment through timely
reforms to provide autonomy, promote transparency, ease of doing
business, good governance, and provide a level playing field for
cooperatives

Strategies to achieve the objective

3.1.1. Encourage States/UTs to suitably amend their respective Cooperative
Societies Acts and Rules to provide autonomy, enhance the ease of doing
business and good governance in order to:

3.1.1.1. ensure autonomous functioning and democratic member control,
3.1.1.2. ensure a time-bound and transparent system for the delivery of services to
cooperative societies,
3.1.1.3. ensure free and fair elections of Board of Directors and office bearers,
3.1.1.4. ensure transparent recruitment processes,
3.1.1.5. infuse democratic, transparent, and data-driven decision-making.

3.1.2. Encourage States/UTs to adopt the best prevailing provisions by suitably
amending their respective Cooperative Societies Acts, Rules, and
cooperatives’ by e-laws. Additionally, support the compilation of these best
practices from the Cooperative Societies Acts and Rules of any States/UTs or
from those outside India.

3.1.3. Encourage States to formulate/reformulate their State Cooperative Policy, in a
manner that both State and Central Governments work towards common goals
for the development of cooperatives.

3.1.4. Encourage States/UTs to completely digitalize all processes of States’
Registrar offices (as provisioned in their respective Acts) to make them
paperless to:

12

3.1.4.1. Facilitate all types of communications and interactions with cooperative
societies with the Registrar offices through online digital means, such as
web portals, e-mail messaging, mobile phone-based messaging, etc.,

3.1.4.2. Establish a State/UT-level database of cooperative societies and enable it
to integrate with the existing NCD maintained by the Ministry of Cooperation
for real-time updates.

3.1.5. Encourage States/UTs to establish an institutional mechanism for the revival of
sick cooperatives.

3.1.6. Bring down cooperative taxes wherever higher than corporate taxes and make
cooperatives eligible for sector -specific financial incentives and concessions
available to corporates.

3.1.7. Converge various programmes and schemes related to cooperatives,
implemented by various Departments/Ministries of the Government of India, to
bring in synergies based on the Whole of Government approach.

3.1.8. Strengthen the role of PACS by designating them as an implementing agency
for various Government schemes being implemented at the grassroots level
and incentivizing the well-performing PACS.

3.1.9. Encourage the development of sector -wise and state -wise composite
performance indices for the ranking of cooperatives on a continuous basis
through a web portal to promote healthy competition and learning from the best
in the spirit of competitiveness & cooperation.

3.2. To foster accessible, affordable finance and equal business opportunities
akin to other economic institutions

Strategies to achieve the objective

3.2.1. Preserve and promote the three-tier credit structure (PACS, DCCB, and StCB)
to dispense affordable credit and maintain democratic character.

3.2.2. Work jointly with the States/UTs to promote the setting up of one PACS in every
panchayat, one DCCB in every district, and one UCB in every urban centre, in

13

uncovered areas, to achieve financial inclusion through cooperatives, subject
to viability.

3.2.3. Encourage cooperative banks to expand their reach and scope by opening new
branches and diversifying financial products and services, subject to viability,
to increase their footprints.

3.2.4. Promote formation of an apex cooperative bank at the national-level to enhance
cooperation among various tiers of cooperative banks so as to harness their
true potential and to provide support, capacity building, professionalism,
business opportunities, etc.

3.2.5. Promote the adoption of digital technology in the cooperative credit and
banking sector for improved customer experience, enhanced operational
efficiency, and robust cybersecurity to prevent risk and fraud, including –

3.2.5.1. common banking software for different layers of cooperative banks,

3.2.5.2. building a strong institutional arrangement to provide shared IT-infra to rural
cooperative banks.

3.2.6. Encourage the recently established Umbrella Organization (NUCFDC) of UCBs
to work in the direction of strengthening UCBs by:

3.2.6.1. developing and professionally managing a common technology platform to
enable UCBs to provide a modern banking experience to its customers,

3.2.6.2. subscribing to the equity of the UCBs,

3.2.6.3. supporting for short-term liquidity,

3.2.6.4. obtaining SRO status from RBI to frame rules & regulations and enforce
them to protect the customer and promote ethics, equality, and
professionalism, etc.

3.2.7. Facilitate the strengthening of cooperative banks to become eligible to handle
government businesses.

3.2.8. Promote the cooperative credit structure, in addition to ARDBs, for dispensing
long-term credit.

14

3.2.9. Form a task force to holistically examine the challenges faced by cooperative
credit institutions (DCCB, PACS, ARDB and land development banks, etc.) and
suggest measures to address these challenges, including issues of long-term
credit and recommend a roadmap to increase the deposits of DCCBs, etc.

3.2.10. Encourage NCDC, NABARD, and similar institutions to help prepare model
DPRs, business feasibility studies, and bankable project reports for
cooperatives.

3.2.11. Expand the scale and scope of activities of the NCDC and enable it to access
cheaper capital for lending at concessional rates to cooperatives.

3.3. To enhance cooperation among cooperatives, strengthen the cooperative
structure, and expand the geographical reach

Strategies to achieve the objective

3.3.1. Encourage cooperatives to create new infrastructure and share existing
infrastructure on mutually beneficial terms, including:

3.3.1.1. sharing physical infrastructure at the panchayat/district level to provide
common services for food and seed quality control testing lab s, including
organic product certification, non -food quality control lab s, soil testing
facilities, veterinary services, warehouse s, cold storage for fast perishable
goods (such as fish, vegetables, etc.), and responsive and efficient supply
chain and logistics,

3.3.1.2. promoting the development of shared digital infrastructure ( such as cloud
computing, data centre support, and cybersecurity operations) to alleviate
the challenges of high costs in technology adoption.

3.3.2. Encourage sectoral national federations to develop a repository of success
stories on prevailing best practices in the cooperative sector to promote the
spirit of cooperation and their emulation.

3.3.3. Encourage cooperatives and their members to open their bank accounts and
to avail of financial services from cooperative banks.

3.3.4. Enable primary cooperatives, including PACS, to work as ‘Bank Mitra’ of
DCCBs to provide banking products and services, including Rupay Kisan Credit
Card to members, at their doorsteps.

15

3.3.5. Encourage the creation of multipurpose PACS, primary dairy cooperatives,
primary fisheries cooperatives , and other sectoral primary cooperatives to
cover all uncovered panchayats within the next five years.

3.3.6. Enhancing reach and strengthening cooperatives in the North Eastern region ,
including remote areas , by providing the requisite institutional and financial
support,

3.3.7. Promote strengthening the upper tiers of the cooperatives to take on larger
responsibilities in supporting their primary members to become more
competitive.

3.3.8. Encourage primary societies, district , and state -level federations to become
members of national cooperatives , such as IFFCO, KRIBHCO, NAFED, etc. ,
and the newly formed three national-level MSCS – NCOL, NCEL, and BBSSL.

3.3.9. Encourage the national -level federations/unions to play lead ing roles in
revitalizing the cooperative sector by helping member cooperatives to develop
and adopt best practices for transparency and good governance, and
deepening the cooperative movement through cooperative advocacy,
awareness and member education.

16

4. Strategic Mission Pillar II: Promoting Vibrancy

The policy envisions vibrant and economically self -reliant cooperatives as the support
structure for members to earn higher incomes. It identifies the promotion of a vibrant
cooperative ecosystem and its multidimensional expansion as the key pathways to
achieve this goal.

4.1. To promote the development of a cooperative business ecosystem

Strategies to achieve the objective

4.1.1. Encourage the creation of a vibrant ecosystem for the growth and development
of cooperative business by promoting a self-sustainable business support
system. This system will provide accessible finance, business research and
advisory services for marketing, branding, etc., alongside support from sectoral
development and capacity-building institutions.
4.1.2. Encourage States/UTs to develop at least one model cooperative village per
district, centred around a multipurpose PACS as the growth engine.
Multipurpose PACS will be encouraged to develop good governance and
business management practices for different business verticals. Other villages
in the district will be prodded and encouraged to first catch up with the model
village, and subsequently aspire to become one of the best in the state.

4.1.3. Encourage States/UTs to promote cooperative-led economic clusters for niche
rural produce such as honey, spices, coffee, tea, medicinal and aromatic
plants, silkworms, fruits, mushrooms, floriculture, poultry produce, etc.

4.1.4. Encourage cooperatives to explore marketing opportunities through
Geographical Indications (GI), Intellectual Property Rights (IPR), and
trademarks.

4.1.5. Encourage the branding of all organic, agricultural, and dairy products under
the aegis of the ‘Bharat’ Brand as an umbrella brand, and leverage the
established brands of the states.

4.1.6. Promote the participation of cooperatives in various fairs and exhibitions at the
international, national, and state levels. This will showcase their brand s and
provide them access to markets.

17

4.2. To promote multi-dimensional expansion, including access to
international markets, and enhance members’ income

Strategies to achieve the objective:

4.2.1. Encourage cooperatives to identify and align with export-oriented products
under the One District One Product-Districts as Export Hubs initiative.

4.2.2. Promote dairy cooperatives to initiate ‘White Revolution 2.0’ for the holistic
development of dairy cooperatives, employment generation , and women ’s
empowerment.

4.2.3. Emphasize promoting fishery cooperatives , including fish seed production in
areas where fisheries are the main source of livelihood, especially in districts
where basic infrastructure is weak.

4.2.4. Promote the cooperative sector to become the leader in the organic products
market.

4.2.5. Promote exports of cooperative sector products to international markets and
enhance the share of the cooperative sector in the total export of the country.

4.2.6. Promote millets production through farmer members of primary cooperatives
and encourage national cooperatives such as NAFED, NCCF, etc., to procure
it for food and nutritional security and popularize it to make it a part of
everybody’s diet.

4.2.7. Promote production of pulses, oilseeds, and maize through farmer members of
primary cooperatives by changing cropping patterns and encourage national
cooperatives such as NAFED, NCCF, etc. to procure them to attain
‘atmanirbharta’ in edible oil and pulses and reduce dependence on imports.

4.2.8. Encourage sugar cooperatives to produce ethanol using alternate feedstocks,
including maize, to support the Ethanol Blending Programme, to reduce
dependence on crude oil imports.

4.2.9. Promote the enhancement of existing processing capacities , including the
manufacturing of value -added products through capital infusion , to increase
members’ incomes.

4.2.10. Constitute a task force to envision and recommend pathways for creating an
economic framework aimed at including atleast 50 crore people within the ambit
of cooperatives and enhancing the cooperative sector ’s contribution to the
Indian economy by three times in the next 10 years.

18

5. Strategic Mission Pillar III: Making Cooperatives Future Ready

Cooperative societies need to adapt to the latest technologies to bridge the digital divide
and become professionally managed economic entities to enhance their operational
efficiency, manage infrastructure, products, and services effectively.

5.1. To promote technology adoption for efficient and transparent
management

Strategies to achieve the objective

5.1.1. Facilitate the design and development of a ‘Cooperative Stack’ for data-driven
decision-making and enhance service delivery. This initiative aims to
consolidate high-quality data within cooperatives and make it readily accessible
to stakeholders for innovation and the creation of new services. The stack may
be developed on a foundation of the existing NCD, incorporating other suitable
databases, and ensuring integration with the Agri-stack, which , amongst
others, would facilitate seamless data integration of cooperative banks with the
Agriculture Ministry’s database for real-time release of interest subvention.

5.1.2. Promote national sectoral federations to actively support technological
upgradation across different cooperative levels and sectors.

5.1.3. Promote cooperatives to leverage e-commerce platforms , such as the
Government e -marketplace (GeM ) and the Open Network for Digital
Commerce (ONDC), to access a large customer base and achieve better
pricing.

5.2. To enable the transformation of cooperatives into professionally
managed economic entities based on cooperative principles

Strategies to achieve the objective

5.2.1. Promote the organizational management of cooperative societies along
professional lines through the creation of an integrated, standardized , and
quality-conscious national -level institutional structure for industry -oriented
education and need -based capacity building . This may be achieved by
establishing an apex organization to:

5.2.1.1. act as a national-level body by creating a pan -India network of existing
education and training institutes/centres in the cooperative sector through

19

affiliation, and to regulate their teachers’ recruitment, admission criteria,
course content and curriculum, examinations, etc.,

5.2.1.2. ensure a stable and adequate supply of young and qualified manpower for
the cooperative sector,

5.2.1.3. appropriately synergize with existing skill development centres/institutes for
conducting skill-related courses,

5.2.1.4. design curricula and courses to meet the requirements of the cooperative
sector,

5.2.1.5. conduct and promote research and development in the cooperative sector,

5.2.1.6. seek institutionalization of sponsored research/practice track Chairs from
the cooperative and private sectors,

5.2.1.7. develop Centres of Excellence for focused and quality education,
incubation, and research in the cooperative sector,

5.2.1.8. promote social enterprise incubators (SEIs) in new and emerging sectors
for providing need-based assistance.

5.2.2. Promote cooperative-centric courses in higher education institutions.

5.2.3. Encourage the utilization of funds available in the Cooperative Education Fund
(CEF) of the Central/State Governments, and with other Ministries of the
Government of India , for cooperative training , skill development , and the
creation of cooperative-specific quality academic content in different Indian
languages for various levels and types of courses on cooperatives.

5.2.4. Facilitate the establishment of an institutional mechanism for Innovation and
Incubation in the cooperative sector , to be led by the proposed apex
organization to:

5.2.4.1. develop and spread sustainable and innovative business practices and
technologies around the locally available resources and means,

5.2.4.2. incubate new cooperatives in emerging fields,

20

5.2.4.3. promote and spread entrepreneurial skills in the cooperative sector.

5.2.5. Encourage cooperative societies to amend their by e-laws suitably to include
training, leadership development, management development , and other
organizational capacity -building program mes for their board members and
employees as an essential element for building human resource capabilities for
different categories of jobs.

5.2.6. Strive for member education based on cooperative principles and values
across all cooperative societies , including new ones , in a time-bound and
universal manner.

5.2.7. Encourage national/state cooperative societies/federations to institute
fellowships to support research scholars in reputed universities/colleges in
pursuing their doctoral and post -doctoral research in important areas of
cooperatives.

5.2.8. Encourage national and state cooperative societies, federations, and unions to
establish cooperative learning cent res at the grassroots level. These cent res
should preferably use vernacular languages for extension and capacity -
building activities to ensure better uptake.

5.2.9. Encourage federations to develop Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) to
evaluate the performance of member cooperatives. Sectoral ratings may be
developed to identify the areas of strength for cooperatives.

5.2.10. Promote a higher level of professionalism in fostering responsive governance,
leadership, and employee competence through technology-enabled
recruitment reforms.

21

6. Strategic Mission Pillar IV: Promoting Inclusivity and Deepening Reach

This policy prioritizes the inclusion of youth and women to ensure increased representation
across all sections of society. It envisions the partnership and collaboration of cooperative
federations/societies to promote cooperatives as a people’s movement.

6.1. To promote inclusivity and member centrality

Strategies to achieve the objective

6.1.1. Encourage the participation of women, youth, small & marginal farmers, and
weaker sections (SC/ST, specially-abled, etc.) to foster inclusivity and assign
them significant roles in cooperatives.

6.1.2. Strengthen and promot e cooperatives for the weaker and ma rginalized
sections in sectors like fisheries, dairy, handloom weaving, handicrafts, minor
forest produce, etc.

6.1.3. Support the development of disaggregated data on gender, weaker section s,
etc. and recommend its inclusion in the NCD for targeted interventions.

6.1.4. Facilitate the development and adoption of model by e-laws for cooperatives
across different tiers and sectors with a focus on strengthening members to:

6.1.4.1. ensure the active participation of members,

6.1.4.2. make provision for a mechanism that collects member-centric feedback and
promote the activation of dormant members,

6.1.4.3. promote membership among women and weaker sections of the
community,

6.1.4.4. ensure centrality of members in decision-making,

6.1.4.5. ensure transparent and corruption-free organizational governance,

6.1.4.6. promote the induction of young and qualified manpower for various
positions.

6.1.5. Strengthen member s of primary cooperative societies by encouraging
national/state federations/ unions to:

22

6.1.5.1. promote an effective and continuous member education programme based
on cooperative principles and values that educates, sensitizes, and makes
members aware of their rights, duties, and responsibilities,

6.1.5.2. focus on enhancing members’ entrepreneurial skills,

6.1.5.3. encourage primary cooperatives to enhance members’ income levels.

6.2. Cooperatives as a people’s movement

Strategies to achieve the objective

6.2.1. Promote cooperative s as a subject in the school curricula across various
grades.

6.2.2. Encourage national-level federations/unions to take a leading role in enhancing
advocacy and awareness about the benefits of cooperatives among the
younger generation, particularly women and the weaker sections . This will
enhance people’s confidence in a cooperative-led economic model, leading to
an increase in membership:

6.2.2.1. by fostering mass-level awareness to motivate the young generation,
particularly women and the weaker sections, to actively participate in the
cooperative movement,

6.2.2.2. by showcasing and disseminating success stories of cooperatives that
highlight how they contribute to the emancipation of the poor and
marginalized,

6.2.2.3. by leveraging various channels, including social media, to share success
stories, utilizing the existing social media infrastructure of national
cooperative federations/unions/societies.

23

7. Strategic Mission Pillar V: Entering New and Emerging Sectors

The policy encourages cooperative societies to enter into new and emerging sectors
suitable for cooperatives to enhance their presence and member base in future. It
encourages cooperatives to practice environment -friendly practices to help achieve
sustainable development goals ( SDGs) such as clean energy, sustainable agriculture,
reverse land degradation, etc.

7.1. To promote and encourag e the entry of cooperatives in new and
emerging sectors

Strategies to achieve the objective

7.1.1. Encourage primary cooperative societies to convert into multipurpose
cooperatives to diversify their businesses into new areas such as PM Jan
Aushadhi Kendra, warehousing, Common Service Centre, Fair Price Shop,
LPG distributorship, petrol/diesel retail outlet, PM Kisan Samriddhi Kendra ,
operation & maintenance of rural piped water supply scheme , etc., subject to
viability, for transforming them into financially and operationally self -reliant
entities.

7.1.2. Promote the entry and strengthening of cooperatives in new and emerging
sectors, in both urban and rural space, such as micro -insurance, renewable
energy, water distribution, health, education, waste management,
transportation, biogas production, mobile application -based aggregator
services ( for example – cooperative of taxi drivers , individuals providing
household services ( like plumber, electrician, etc.)), etc., to enhance
diversification and increase member income.

7.2. To promote environment-friendly practices and a circular economy for
sustainability

Strategies to achieve the objective

7.2.1. Encourage the adoption of circular economy practices through the promotion
of digitalization and disruptive technologies such as Internet of Things ( IoT),
blockchain, reverse logistics, etc., by:

7.2.1.1. promoting suitable use cases as pilots to assess their applicability in the
cooperative sector for adoption.

7.2.2. Encourage PACS member farmers to adopt climate-resilient cropping patterns,

24

and harvest renewable energy such as solar, wind, etc. on farm bunds, with a
special focus on reducing the carbon footprint and mitigating climate risks.

7.2.3. Encourage the practice of o rganic, natural farming, agroforestry, and the
reclamation of degraded land through PACS. The Central/State Governments
could prioritize the implementation of schemes in this regard through PACS.

7.2.4. Promote biogas production in villages through primary dairy cooperatives in a
decentralized manner.

25

8. Strategic Mission Pillar VI: Shaping Young Generation for Cooperative
Growth
Inspiring the young generation through success stories of individual cooperative societies
and biographies of veteran cooperators ; Providing cooperative -oriented experiential
learning that develops a fair understanding of the rural economy, cooperative values &
principles and working of cooperative societies ; Imparting professional education &
training in multiple domains, such as cooperative history, laws, auditing and accounting,
finance, governance and operations, and cooperative -focused business management.
This also includes equipping and enhancing the technical skills of rural youth for
meaningful employment in the cooperative sector. The proposed apex organization and
its affiliated institutions will lead all activities under this initiative.

8.1. To motivate and inspire youth, especially those in rural and semi -urban
areas, to pursue long-term careers in cooperative enterprises.

Strategies to achieve the objectives

8.1.1. Initiate a nationwide movement at the district level for youth through seminars,
workshops, dramas, films, and videos and share success stories in schools,
colleges and social media platforms. The proposed apex organization will drive
the initiative with s upport from state -level cooperative education and training
institutes, including national/state federations.

8.1.2. Promote the development of future cooperative leaders to manage cooperative
societies professionally.

8.2. To promote the development of standardized, high -quality, cooperative-
focused courses and the creation of authoritative content.

Strategies to achieve the objectives

8.2.1. To identify, design and develop cooperative-focused courses for professional
diploma and degree programs, including certification courses through a multi -
layered consultation process with stakeholders , including national/state-level
cooperative societies/federations, etc. This will ensure that upon course
completion, candidates are employment-ready and can secure suitable jobs in
the cooperative sector that match their competencies and skill sets.

8.2.2. To encourage higher education institutions (HEIs) that offer degrees and
diplomas in social sciences to also offer apex organization -certified diplomas,
degrees, and certification courses, thereby making cooperative courses
universally accessible.

26

8.3. To promote an ecosystem for skilling and upskilling of youth and women
for employment in the cooperative sector

Strategies to achieve the objectives

8.3.1. Create a database of training institutions established/funded by central and
state governments offering programs for training and skill development of
ground-level workers for both technical and non -technical jobs in cooperative
societies.

8.3.2. Develop a pan -India ecosystem of training and skill development institutions
through partnerships/MoUs.

8.3.3. Promote financial & digital literacy among rural and semi-urban youth to make
them employable in the cooperative sector.

8.4. To ensure the availability of cooperative sector practitioners as part-time
resource person s, quality teachers, instructors, trainers, and visiting
faculty in sufficient numbers, in the cooperative sector.

Strategies to achieve the objectives

8.4.1. Develop and recommend a standardized recruitment process and eligibility
criteria (such as educational qualification, teaching experience, etc.) for various
categories of teachers, instructors, trainers, and resource persons, including
visiting faculty and part-time resource persons, for affiliated institutes.

8.4.2. Design an appropriate and attractive remuneration structure for various levels
of teaching personnel in the affiliated institutes.

8.4.3. Create a pool of newly certified teachers and instructors through a well -
structured system, while enhancing the academic capabilities of existing
teachers and instructors in the cooperative sector.

8.4.4. Establish a nationwide database of cooperative teachers, instructors, resource
persons, and trainers, including information on their location, experience, and
area of expertise.

27

8.5. To develop an ecosystem that facilitates the ease of hiring of suitable
candidates by cooperatives and simplifies the job search process for
potential candidates.

Strategies to achieve the objectives

8.5.1. Establish and manage a national digital cooperative employment exchange
through the proposed apex organization. This digital platform will efficiently
match the job seekers with new employment opportunities in the cooperative
sector.

28

9. Monitoring and Implementation Structure

9.1. The implementation of the policy will adhere to the principles of cooperative
federalism.

9.2. Considering the structure of the cooperative sector, the smooth and effective
implementation of the policy requires the active participation of relevant
Ministries/Departments of the Central Government, State/UT Governments,
and national/state-level cooperative societies/federations/unions . It also
involves sectoral development institutions such as NABARD, NCDC, NDDB,
and NFDB.

9.3. To ensure the policy is implemented effectively and within a set timeframe, an
‘Implementation Cell’ will be created within the Ministry of Cooperation . This
cell will receive support from a dedicated Project Management Unit for technical
assistance on the subject, documentation, coordination, monitoring, reporting,
and more.

9.4. A detailed action plan , complete with intervention-specific timelines for the
implementation of the policy , will be finalized soon after the release of the
Policy.

9.5. Put in place an institutional mechanism for monitoring the implementation of
the Policy through:

9.5.1. A ‘National Steering Committee on Cooperation Policy ’, chaired by the Union
Minister of Cooperation, to be constituted for overall guidance, inter-ministerial
coordination, periodic policy review, etc . This committee may include the
Hon’ble Minister-in-charge of related Ministries of the Government of India as
members,

9.5.2. A national-level ‘Policy Implementation and Monitoring Committee’, chaired by
the Union Cooperation Secretary , to be established for central -state
coordination, troubleshooting implementation bottlenecks, periodic monitoring
and evaluation, etc . It may comprise members, including the Secretary of
related Ministries of the Government of India, Secretaries/Principal
Secretaries/Additional Chief Secretaries of the Cooperative Department of all
States/Union Territories, a representative from NITI Aayog, and
Chairpersons/MDs of national cooperative federations/unions/societies,
NABARD, NDDB, NCDC, NCCT, VAMNICOM, etc.